Supreme Court of Florida 
 
 
____________  
 
No. SC05-1295 
____________ 
 
UNITED STATES FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY, etc., 
Petitioner, 
 
vs. 
 
J.S.U.B., INC., etc., et al.,  
Respondents. 
 
[December 20, 2007] 
 

PARIENTE, J. 

 

J.S.U.B., Inc. seeks review of the decision of the Second District Court of 

Appeal in J.S.U.B., Inc. v. United States Fire Insurance Co., 906 So. 2d 303 (Fla. 

2d DCA 2005), which is in express and direct conflict with the decision of the 

Fourth District Court of Appeal in Lassiter Construction Co. v. American States 

Insurance Co., 699 So. 2d 768 (Fla. 4th DCA 1997). 1   The conflict issue is whether 

a post-1986 standard form commercial general liability (CGL) policy with 

products-completed operations hazard coverage, issued to a general contractor, 

                                           
1.  We have jurisdiction.  See art. V, § 3(b)(3), Fla. Const. 
 

provides coverage when a claim is made against the contractor for damage to the 

completed project caused by a subcontractor’s defective work.   

We answer this question in the affirmative.  We conclude that defective 

work performed by a subcontractor that causes damage to the contractor’s 

completed project and is neither expected nor intended from the standpoint of the 

contractor can constitute “property damage” caused by an “occurrence” as those 

terms are defined in a standard form commercial general liability policy.  

Accordingly, a claim made against the contractor for damage to the completed 

project caused by a subcontractor’s defective work is covered under a post-1986 

CGL policy unless a specific exclusion applies to bar coverage.  In this case, the 

terms of the policy included an exception to the “Your Work” exclusion for faulty 

workmanship by a subcontractor and did not include a breach of contract 

exclusion.  We therefore approve the Second District’s decision in J.S.U.B. and 

disapprove the Fourth District’s decision in Lassiter.      

FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

J.S.U.B., Inc., and Logue Enterprises, Inc., as partners of First Home 

Builders of Florida (“J.S.U.B.”), contracted to build several homes in the Lehigh 

Acres area of Lee County, Florida.  After completion and delivery of the homes to 

the homeowners, damage to the foundations, drywall, and other interior portions of 

the homes appeared.  It is undisputed that the damage to the homes was caused by 

 

- 2 -

subcontractors’ use of poor soil and improper soil compaction and testing.  The 

homeowners demanded that J.S.U.B. repair or remedy the damages, asserting 

breach of contract, breach of warranty, negligence, strict liability, and violation of 

the Florida Building Code.    

During the period in which the homes were built, J.S.U.B. was insured under 

a commercial general liability policy and renewal policy issued by United States 

Fire Insurance Company (“U.S. Fire”).  The policies provide coverage for the 

“sums that the insured becomes legally obligated to pay as damages because of 

‘bodily injury’ or ‘property damage’” caused by an “occurrence” within the 

“coverage territory” during the policy period.  As defined in the policies, an 

“occurrence” is “an accident, including continuous or repeated exposure to 

substantially the same general harmful conditions,” and “property damage” 

includes “[p]hysical injury to tangible property, including all resulting loss of use 

of that property.”  The policies also contain “products-completed operations 

hazard” coverage that 

[i]ncludes all “bodily injury” and “property damage” occurring away 
from premises you own or rent and arising out of “your product” or 
“your work” except:  
. . . .    
 
(2) Work that has not yet been completed or abandoned.[ 2 ]   
                                           
 
2.  Under the policies, J.S.U.B. had a per occurrence limit of $1 million, a 
general aggregate limit of $2 million, and a separate products-completed 
operations hazard aggregate limit of $2 million for which additional premiums 
were charged.        

 

- 3 -

 

The coverage provisions are limited by numerous exclusions.  Of particular 

relevance are those exclusions, with their exceptions, that exclude coverage for 

damage to the insured’s property and work:  

j.  

  

. . . .  
l. 

Damage To Property  
“Property damage” to:  
. . . . 
(5)   That particular part of real property on which you or any 
contractors or subcontractors working directly or 
indirectly on your behalf are performing operations, if the 
“property damage” arises out of those operations;  or  
(6)   That particular part of any property that must be restored, 
repaired or replaced because “your work” was incorrectly 
performed on it.  

 . . . . 
Paragraph (6) of this exclusion does not apply to “property 
damage” included in the “products-completed operations 
hazard”.  

Damage To Your Work  
“Property damage” to “your work” arising out of it or any part 
of it and included in the “products-completed operations 
hazard”.  
This exclusion does not apply if the damaged work or the work 
out of which the damage arises was performed on your behalf 
by a subcontractor.  

 
(Emphases supplied.) 3    
                                           
 
3.  The policies define “your work” as follows: 
  

“Your work” means:  
a.   Work or operations performed by you or on your behalf;  and  
b.   Materials, parts or equipment furnished in connection with such 
work or operations.  

 

 

“Your work” includes:  

- 4 -

 

J.S.U.B. sought coverage under the policies for the structural damage to the 

homes and the damage to the homeowners’ personal property.  U.S. Fire agreed 

that the policies provided coverage for damage to the homeowners’ personal 

property, such as the homeowners’ wallpaper.  However, U.S. Fire asserted that 

there was no insurance coverage for the costs of repairing the structural damage to 

the homes, such as the damage to the foundations and drywall.   

J.S.U.B. made the necessary repairs to the homes and filed a declaratory 

judgment action to determine whether coverage existed for the cost of repairing the 

structural damage.  The circuit court entered judgment in favor of U.S. Fire.  Citing 

to LaMarche v. Shelby Mutual Insurance Co., 390 So. 2d 325 (Fla. 1980), the 

circuit court found that the CGL policies did not provide   

coverage for faulty workmanship and that the damages alleged by 
[J.S.U.B.] and caused by [J.S.U.B.’s] subcontractors’ use of poor soil, 
improper soil compaction and testing are the faulty workmanship for 
which no coverage exists under the subject policies.  

J.S.U.B. appealed and the Second District Court of Appeal reversed.  The Second 

District held that LaMarche did not control.  The Second District further concluded 

that the policies contained “broad policy language” that provided coverage to 

J.S.U.B. in light of this Court’s subsequent decision in State Farm Fire & Casualty 
                                                                                                                                        
a.   Warranties or representations made at any time with respect to 
the fitness, quality, durability, performance or use of “your 
work”;  and  
b.     The providing of or failure to provide warnings or instructions.  

 

- 5 -

Co. v. CTC Development Corp., 720 So. 2d 1072 (Fla. 1998), and that none of the 

exclusions in the policies applied.  See J.S.U.B., 906 So. 2d at 309, 311.  

 

Construing a CGL policy similar to those at issue in this case, the Fourth 

District Court of Appeal came to a contrary conclusion in Lassiter.  In that case, 

the contractor argued that because exclusions (j)(6) and (l) “do not exclude work 

performed by subcontractors, there is coverage for the defective work performed 

by subcontractors.”  Lassiter, 699 So. 2d at 770.  The Fourth District disagreed, 

summarily concluding that “[t]he insured has failed to demonstrate that there are 

any provisions in the coverage section of the policy which would provide coverage 

for this defective work.”  Id.  We accepted jurisdiction to resolve the conflict 

between J.S.U.B. and Lassiter.    

ANALYSIS 

The issue we decide is whether a post-1986 standard form commercial 

general liability policy with products-completed operations hazard coverage, 

issued to a general contractor, provides coverage when a claim is made against the 

contractor for damage to the completed project caused by a subcontractor’s 

defective work. 4   This is an issue of insurance policy construction, which is a 

question of law subject to de novo review.  See Fayad v. Clarendon Nat’l Ins. Co., 

899 So. 2d 1082, 1085 (Fla. 2005).  
                                           
 
4.  U.S. Fire does not argue that any of the policy exclusions apply to bar 
coverage.   

 

- 6 -

In resolving this issue, we first set forth the standards for construing 

insurance contracts and outline the origin and evolution of CGL policies, 

highlighting the changes that have been made to the relevant language of the 

insuring provisions and exclusions over the years.  We then review our decision in 

LaMarche, which has been relied on by courts to deny coverage for damage to a 

completed project caused by a subcontractor’s defective work.  We then analyze 

whether under CGL policies issued after 1986, a subcontractor’s faulty 

workmanship can constitute an “occurrence” as that term is defined in the policy 

and as interpreted in CTC Development.   Finally, we analyze the definition of 

“property damage” to determine whether the damage to the completed homes 

comes within the policy definition.   

A.   Standards for Construing Insurance Contracts       

Our interpretation of insurance contracts, such as the CGL policies in this 

case, is governed by generally accepted rules of construction.  Insurance contracts 

are construed according to their plain meaning, with any ambiguities construed 

against the insurer and in favor of coverage.  See Taurus Holdings, Inc. v. U.S. Fid. 

& Guar. Co., 913 So. 2d 528, 532 (Fla. 2005).  Further, “in construing insurance 

policies, courts should read each policy as a whole, endeavoring to give every 

provision its full meaning and operative effect.”  Auto-Owners Ins. Co. v. 

Anderson, 756 So. 2d 29, 34 (Fla. 2000).  Accordingly, “[a]lthough exclusionary 

 

- 7 -

clauses cannot be relied upon to create coverage, principles governing the 

construction of insurance contracts dictate that when construing an insurance 

policy to determine coverage the pertinent provisions should be read in pari 

materia.”  CTC Development, 720 So. 2d at 1074-75 (citations, alteration, and 

internal quotation marks omitted).   

B. 

The Origin and Evolution of CGL Policies  

 

Commercial General Liability policies are designed to protect an insured 

against certain losses arising out of business operations.  See Travelers Indem. Co. 

of Am. v. Moore & Assocs., Inc., 216 S.W.3d 302, 305 (Tenn. 2007).  The first 

standard form comprehensive general liability insurance policy was drafted by the 

insurance industry in 1940.  See 21 Eric Mills Holmes, Holmes’ Appleman on 

Insurance 2d, §129.1, at 7 (2002). 5   The standard policy was the result of a 

voluntary effort in the insurance industry to address the misunderstanding, 

coverage disputes, and litigation that resulted from the unique language used by 

each liability insurer.  See id.; see also Dimmitt Chevrolet, Inc. v. Se. Fid. Ins. 

Corp., 636 So. 2d 700, 702 (Fla. 1993) (explaining that CGL policies “are standard 

insurance policies developed by insurance industry trade associations, and these 

policies are the primary form of commercial insurance coverage obtained by 

                                           
5.  In 1986, the “Comprehensive General Liability” policy was renamed the 
“Commercial General Liability” policy.  However, the acronym “CGL” is 
commonly used to refer to both.  See id.  

 

- 8 -

businesses throughout the country”).    

  

Since 1940, the standard policy has been revised several times.  See 21 

Holmes, supra, §129.1, at 7-8.  We review these changes because the insuring 

agreement has been expanded over the years and the exclusions narrowed.  With 

regard to the insuring agreement, the language was expanded from providing 

coverage only for damages “caused by an accident” to include coverage for 

damages caused by an “occurrence,” which is defined as “an accident, including 

continuous or repeated exposure to substantially the same general harmful 

conditions.”  Compare 16 id. § 117.1, at 215, with 20 id. § 129.2, at 104.  In CTC 

Development, we explained that an “occurrence,” which is defined as an 

“accident,” encompasses damage that is “neither expected nor intended from the 

standpoint of the insured.”  720 So. 2d at 1076.             

Like the insuring language, the exclusions in standard CGL policies have 

been modified over the years.  See generally 21 Holmes, supra, §132.1-132.9, at 5-

158.  The exclusions that are of significance to our analysis in this case are the 

“business risk” exclusions, including the “your work” and “your product” 

exclusions.  The 1973 standard CGL policy interpreted in LaMarche contained 

broad exclusions for damage to “your work” and “your product” stating that the 

insurance did not apply 

(n) to property damage to the named insured’s products arising out of 
such products or any part of such products;  

 

- 9 -

(o) to property damage to work performed by or on behalf of the 
named insured arising out of the work or any portion thereof, or out of 
materials, parts or equipment furnished in connection therewith. 

 
390 So. 2d at 326; 21 Holmes, supra, §132.1, at 11 (emphasis supplied).   

Beginning in 1976, the insured could purchase a Broad Form Property 

Endorsement.  See Am. Family Mut. Ins. Co. v. Am. Girl, Inc., 673 N.W.2d 65, 83 

(Wis. 2004).  This endorsement replaced exclusion (o), set forth above, and 

exclusion (k), which excluded damage to property owned by or within the control 

of the insured.  As to exclusion (o), the endorsement replaced it with more specific 

exclusions and also differentiated between property damage that occurred before 

and after operations were completed.  The endorsement provided that the insurance 

did not apply:     

(d) 

to that particular part of any property . . .  

(i) 
upon which operations are being performed by or on 
behalf of the insured at the time of the property damage arising 
out of such operations, or 

(ii) 

out of which any property damage arises, or 

(iii) 
the restoration, repair or replacement of which has been 
made or is necessary by reason of faulty workmanship thereon 
by or on behalf of the insured; . . . 

(3) with respect to the completed operations hazard and with 
respect to any classification stated in the policy or the 
company’s manual as “including completed operations,” to 
property damage to work performed by the named insured 
arising out of such work or any portion thereof, or out of such 
materials, parts or equipment furnished in connection therewith. 

 

- 10 -

21 Holmes, supra, §132.9, at 149 (emphasis supplied).  Thus, with regard to 

completed operations, the endorsement eliminated the exclusion for “work 

performed on behalf of the named insured.”   

When the CGL policy was revised again in 1986, it contained new 

provisions that incorporated and clarified the Broad Form Property Endorsement.  

See id. at 149, 153.  New exclusion (j)(6) and the exception to this exclusion 

clearly stated that the exclusion for faulty workmanship did not apply to work 

within the products-completed operation hazard:   

 
 
 
 
 

This insurance does not apply to: 
 
j. 
 
 

Damage to Property 
“Property damage” to: 
. . . .  
(6)   That particular part of any property that must be restored, 
repaired or replaced because “your work” was incorrectly 
performed on it.  
 . . . . 
Paragraph (6) of this exclusion does not apply to “property damage” 
included in the “products-completed operations hazard.” 

 
Id. at 145, 153 (emphasis supplied).  The 1986 policy also added new exclusion (l), 

the “your work exclusion,” with an express exception for subcontractor work as 

follows: 

This insurance does not apply to: 
. . . .  
l. 

Damage To Your Work  
“Property damage” to “your work” arising out of it or any part 
of it and included in the “products-completed operations 
hazard”.  

- 11 -

 

 

This exclusion does not apply if the damaged work or the work 
out of which the damage arises was performed on your behalf 
by a subcontractor.  

 
Id. at 145, 152 (emphasis supplied).  The reason for this 1986 revision that added 

the subcontractor exception has been explained as follows: 

[T]he insurance and policyholder communities agreed that the CGL 
policy should provide coverage for defective construction claims so 
long as the allegedly defective work had been performed by a 
subcontractor rather than the policyholder itself.  This resulted both 
because of the demands of the policyholder community (which 
wanted this sort of coverage) and the view of insurers that the CGL 
was a more attractive product that could be better sold if it contained 
this coverage. 

See 2 Jeffrey W. Stempel, Stempel on Insurance Contracts §14.13[D] at 14-224.8 

(3d ed. Supp. 2007).  Moreover, the Insurance Services Office promulgated a 

circular on July 15, 1986, confirming that the 1986 revisions to the standard CGL 

policy not only incorporated the “Broad Form” property endorsement but also 

specifically “cover[ed] damage caused by faulty workmanship to other parts of 

work in progress; and damage to, or caused by, a subcontractor’s work after the 

insured’s operations are completed.”  Insurance Services Office Circular, 

Commercial General Liability Program Instructions Pamphlet, No. GL-86-204 

(July 15, 1986). 6   Of course, the subcontractor’s exception to the general exclusion 

                                           
 
6.  The Insurance Services Office, Inc., also known as ISO, is an industry 
organization that promulgates various standard insurance policies that are utilized 
by insurers throughout the country, including the standard CGL policy at issue in 
this case.  See, e.g., Hartford Fire Ins. Co. v. California, 509 U.S. 764, 772 (1993) 

 

- 12 -

for a contractor’s defective work becomes important only if there is coverage 

under the initial insuring provision. 

C. 

LaMarche     

The threshold issue in this case, whether a subcontractor’s defective work 

can constitute an “occurrence,” requires us to examine our decision in LaMarche 

because it is the Florida case that is generally cited to support the proposition that 

CGL policies do not provide coverage for damage to the contractor’s work caused 

by faulty workmanship.  The issue in LaMarche involved a claim for a contractor’s 

faulty workmanship, which the homeowners argued caused structural defects and 

consequent secondary damage.  See Shelby Mut. Ins. Co. v. LaMarche, 371 So. 2d 

198, 200 (Fla. 2d DCA 1979).  The contractor entered into an agreement for the 

construction of a home, under which all workmanship with regard to the structure 

was guaranteed for five years from the date of delivery.  See LaMarche, 390 So. 2d 

at 326.  The CGL policy issued to the contractor provided that the insurer “would 

pay for bodily injury or property damage for which the contractor became liable.”  

Id.  However, the policy also included the following relevant exclusionary 

provisions, which were standard in 1973 CGL policies:     
                                                                                                                                        
(“Insurance Services Office, Inc. (ISO), an association of approximately 1,400 
domestic property and casualty insurers . . . , is the almost exclusive source of 
support services in this country for CGL insurance.  ISO develops standard policy 
forms and files or lodges them with each State’s insurance regulators; most CGL 
insurance written in the United States is written on these forms.”) (citations 
omitted). 

 

- 13 -

(a) to liability assumed by the insured under any contract or 
agreement except an incidental contract; but this exclusion does not 
apply to a warrant[y] of fitness or quality of the named insured’s 
products or a warranty that work performed by or on behalf of the 
named insured will be done in a workmanlike manner; 
(n) to property damage to the named insured’s products arising out of 
such products or any part of such products; 
(o) to property damage to work performed by or on behalf of the 
named insured arising out of the work or any portion thereof, or out of 
materials, parts or equipment furnished in connection therewith[.] 

The work performed by the contractor was defective, and the homeowners, 

Id.  
 

as beneficiaries under the insurance contract, sought coverage for replacing the 

defective materials and workmanship.  The homeowners argued that 

the average person would interpret subparagraph (a) as granting 
coverage for damages arising from a breach of warranty of fitness or a 
failure to perform work in a workmanlike manner.  Petitioners further 
argue that the homeowner, as beneficiary of the insured, should be 
granted coverage because the policy is ambiguous.   

Id.  The Court rejected both contentions, ruling that “[t]he district court was correct 

in concluding that an exclusion does not provide coverage but limits coverage.”  

Id.   

The Court noted that the district court’s decision was consistent with the 

majority of other jurisdictions, which had concluded that “the purpose of this 

comprehensive liability insurance coverage is to provide protection for personal 

injury or for property damage caused by the completed product, but not for the 

replacement and repair of that product.”  Id.  The Court reasoned that this 

interpretation was consistent with the intent of the parties as evidenced by the 

 

- 14 -

language of the exclusions:   

We find this interpretation was not the intent of the contractor and the 
insurance company when they entered into the subject contract of 
insurance, and the language of the policy clearly excludes this type of 
coverage. 

Id.    

Thus, although LaMarche used broad language regarding the purpose of 

CGL policies, LaMarche’s ultimate determination that there was no coverage for 

repair and replacement of the contractor’s own defective work was based on the 

policy exclusions, not the insuring provisions.  This is evident for several reasons.     

 

First, the issue before the district court in LaMarche was whether the “three 

exclusions [at issue in the CGL policy] are clear and unambiguous” and the court’s 

decision, which this Court fully approved, stated:  

In resolving the issue raised on appeal we make no decision as 
to whether the policy expressly provides coverage for the damage 
which resulted to appellees’ residence.  That question is not before us. 
We hold only that the exclusions at issue here do not create an 
ambiguity.  

371 So. 2d at 200-01.  Accordingly, the issue on appeal to this Court was whether 

the district court correctly concluded that the exclusions were clear and 

unambiguous, which is apparent by this Court solely discussing the issue of 

coverage in terms of the exclusions.  Indeed, the Court found that “the language of 

the policy clearly excludes this type of coverage,” which is further evidence that 

 

- 15 -

the Court’s decision was based on the exclusions.  LaMarche, 390 So. 2d at 326.  

We agree with the Second District in J.S.U.B., which recognized this distinction: 

Our decision [in LaMarche] specified that we were not deciding 
whether the CGL policy expressly provided coverage for the damage 
that had been incurred, but rather, we determined that the policy 
exclusions that were at issue did not create an ambiguity. Id. at 201.  
In its review of our decision, the supreme court also focused on the 
exclusionary language and concluded that the policy excluded 
coverage for building flaws or deficiencies and “instead covers 
damage caused by these flaws.” LaMarche, 390 So. 2d at 326.   

906 So. 2d at 307-08. 

Second, the Court in LaMarche adopted in full the reasoning and analysis of 

the New Jersey Supreme Court’s decision in Weedo v. Stone-E-Brick, Inc., 405 

A.2d 788, 792 (N.J. 1979), which was based on the same exclusions at issue in 

LaMarche; specifically, the “insured products” (exclusion “(n)”) and “work 

performed” (exclusion “(o)”) exclusions.  The Weedo court explained that the 

insuring provisions “set forth, in fundamental terms, the general outlines of 

coverage,” while “[t]he limitations on coverage are set forth in the exclusion 

clauses of the policy, whose function it is to restrict and shape the coverage 

otherwise afforded.”  Id. at 790.  The court then noted that the insurer conceded 

that 

 

but for the exclusions in the policy, coverage would obtain.  Hence we 
need not address the validity of one of the carrier’s initially-offered 
grounds of non-coverage, namely, that the policy did not extend 
coverage for the claims made even absent the exclusions. 

- 16 -

 Id. at 790 n.2.   

The New Jersey Supreme Court concluded that coverage was lacking, not 

due to the insuring provisions, but because faulty workmanship by a contractor was 

specifically excluded based on the clear and unambiguous “business risk” 

exclusionary clauses.  Id. at 792-95 (concluding that the language of these 

“business risk” exclusions was clear and rejecting the argument that these 

exclusions were rendered ambiguous when read in conjunction with exclusion (a)).  

Additionally, the Court reinforced that it was looking to the exclusions to 

determine if coverage existed by stating the principle that “[t]he limitations on 

coverage are set forth in the exclusion clauses of the policy, whose function it is to 

restrict and shape the coverage otherwise afforded.”  Id. at 790.  Thus, it is clear 

that LaMarche relied on the exclusions to determine that no coverage existed in 

that case. 

U.S. Fire and the amici curiae that support its position argue that LaMarche 

and the district court decisions that reiterate LaMarche’s broad language regarding 

the purpose of CGL policies stand for the proposition that faulty workmanship that 

damages the contractor’s own work can never constitute a covered “occurrence.”  

See, e.g., Sekura v. Granada Ins. Co., 896 So. 2d 861, 862 (Fla. 3d DCA 2005); 

Lassiter, 699 So. 2d at 769; Home Owners Warranty Corp. v. Hanover Ins. Co., 

683 So. 2d 527, 529 (Fla. 3d DCA 1996); Tucker Constr. Co. v. Michigan Mut. 

 

- 17 -

Ins. Co., 423 So. 2d 525, 527-28 (Fla. 5th DCA 1982).  We disagree.  Although 

some of these district court decisions may have reached the correct result under 

their particular facts, none of them expressly considered whether it is appropriate 

to apply LaMarche’s rationale to cases involving different policy provisions. 7    

We conclude that the holding in LaMarche, which relied on Weedo and 

involved the issue of whether there was coverage for the contractor’s own 

defective work, was dependent on the policy language of pre-1986 CGL policies, 

including the relevant insuring provisions and applicable exclusions.  The 

Minnesota Supreme Court, the Tennessee Supreme Court, and the Wisconsin 

Supreme Court reached the same conclusion regarding prior state court decisions 

that relied on Weedo and interpreted pre-1986 CGL policies.  See Wanzek Constr., 

Inc. v. Employers Ins. of Wausau, 679 N.W.2d 322, 327 (Minn. 2004); Moore & 

Assocs., Inc., 216 S.W.3d at 307; Am. Girl, 673 N.W.2d at 77. 

Because LaMarche involved a claim of faulty workmanship by the 

contractor, rather than a claim of faulty workmanship by the subcontractor, and 

because the policy being interpreted involved distinct exclusions and exceptions, 
                                           
7.  For example, in Home Owners, the Third District relied on LaMarche 
 
and Weedo in concluding that a post-1986 CGL policy did not provide coverage 
for the cost of both repair and maintenance as a result of construction defects.  See 
683 So. 2d at 529.  However, the court also noted that the complaint did not 
identify any damages caused by the alleged defects.  See id. at 528 n.2.  As 
explained below, it is unlikely that based on these allegations, there was coverage 
under the policy because there was no allegation that the faulty workmanship 
caused “property damage.” 

 

- 18 -

we do not regard LaMarche as binding precedent in this case.  The role of 

precedent in insurance policy interpretation cases depends largely on whether the 

underlying facts and the policies at issue in the two decisions are similar.  Indeed, 

precedent has been defined as “A decided case that furnishes a basis for 

determining later cases involving similar facts or issues.”  Black’s Law Dictionary 

1214 (8th ed. 2004) (emphasis supplied).  Thus, whether a decision is binding on 

another is dependent upon there being similar facts and legal issues.  As Justice 

Overton observed in his concurrence in Perez v. State, 620 So. 2d 1256, 1259 (Fla. 

1993),  

[t]he doctrine of precedent is basic to our system of justice.  In simple 
terms, it ensures that similarly situated individuals are treated alike 
rather than in accordance with the personal view of any particular 
judge.  In other words, precedent requires that, when the facts are the 
same, the law should be applied the same.   

However, where the policies and underlying facts are different, then a previous 

decision should not be binding.  We recognized this principle in Travelers 

Indemnity Co. v. PCR, Inc., 889 So. 2d 779, 791 n.13 (Fla. 2004) (questioning the 

applicability of a previous decision’s definition of a policy term in a subsequent 

case where the exclusionary clauses were materially different).  

Accordingly, our decision in LaMarche does not control the resolution of the 

issue in this case, namely, whether a subcontractor’s faulty workmanship is 

covered in a post-1986 CGL policy.  Instead, we first analyze the specific insuring 

 

- 19 -

provisions of the current policy to determine whether a subcontractor’s faulty 

workmanship that results in damage to the contractor’s work can constitute an 

“occurrence” as that term has been defined under Florida case law.  In doing so, we 

apply well-established principles of insurance contract interpretation, reading the 

policy both in accord with its plain language, construing any ambiguities in favor 

of the insured, see Taurus Holdings, 913 So. 2d at 532, and “as a whole, 

endeavoring to give every provision its full meaning and operative effect.”  

Anderson, 756 So. 2d at 34.          

D.  Whether Faulty Workmanship Can Constitute an “Occurrence”  

The question of whether faulty workmanship can constitute an “occurrence” 

is a matter governed by the actual terms of the policy and Florida law interpreting 

insurance contracts.  The policy and renewal policy in this case define an 

“occurrence” as an “accident” but leave “accident” undefined.  Thus, under our 

decision in CTC Development, these policies provide coverage not only for 

“‘accidental events,’ but also injuries or damage neither expected nor intended 

from the standpoint of the insured.”  720 So. 2d at 1076.    

U.S. Fire nevertheless argues that a subcontractor’s faulty workmanship that 

damages the contractor’s own work can never be an “accident” because it results in 

reasonably foreseeable damages.  We expressly rejected the use of the concept of 

“natural and probable consequences” or “foreseeability” in insurance contract 

 

- 20 -

interpretation in CTC Development when we receded from prior case law.  See id. 

at 1074-77.   

Further, we fail to see how defective work that results in a claim against the 

contractor because of injury to a third party or damage to a third party’s property is 

“unforeseeable,” while the same defective work that results in a claim against the 

contractor because of damage to the completed project is “foreseeable.”  This 

distinction would make the definition of “occurrence” dependent on which 

property was damaged.  For example, applying U.S. Fire’s interpretation in this 

case would make the subcontractor’s improper soil compaction and testing an 

“occurrence” when it damages the homeowners’ personal property, such as the 

wallpaper, but not an “occurrence” when it damages the homeowners’ foundations 

and drywall.  As the Tennessee Supreme Court explained, in rejecting this 

distinction:    

A shingle falling and injuring a person is a natural consequence of an 
improperly installed shingle just as water damage is a natural 
consequence of an improperly installed window.  If we assume that 
either the shingle or the window installation will be completed 
negligently, it is foreseeable that damages will result.  If, however, we 
assume that the installation of both the shingle and the window will be 
completed properly, then neither the falling shingle nor the water 
penetration is foreseeable and both events are “accidents.”  Assuming 
that the windows would be installed properly, Moore could not have 
foreseen the water penetration.  Because we conclude the water 
penetration was an event that was unforeseeable to Moore, the alleged 
water penetration is both an “accident” and an “occurrence” for which 
there is coverage under the “insuring agreement.” 

 

- 21 -

Moore & Assocs., 216 S.W.3d at 309.   

 

We also conclude that U.S. Fire’s argument that a breach of contract can 

never result in an “accident” is not supported by the plain language of the policies.  

The Wisconsin Supreme Court came to the same conclusion in American Girl:     

[T]here is nothing in the basic coverage language of the current CGL 
policy to support any definitive tort/contract line of demarcation for 
purposes of determining whether a loss is covered by the CGL’s 
initial grant of coverage.  “Occurrence” is not defined by reference to 
the legal category of the claim.  The term “tort” does not appear in the 
CGL policy.   

673 N.W.2d at 77.  The Kansas Supreme Court followed American Girl’s 

reasoning in holding that a subcontractor’s defective work can constitute an 

“occurrence” under Kansas law.  See Lee Builders, Inc. v. Farm Bureau Mut. Ins. 

Co., 137 P.3d 486, 491 (Kan. 2006). 8    

If U.S. Fire intended to preclude coverage based on the cause of action 

asserted, it was incumbent on U.S. Fire to include clear language to accomplish 

this result.  See Container Corp. of Am. v. Maryland Cas. Co., 707 So. 2d 733, 736 

(Fla. 1998) (“Had Maryland wished to limit Container’s coverage to vicarious 

liability, it could have done so by clear policy language.”).  In fact, there is a 

                                           
 
8.  American Girl most closely resembles the factual scenario in J.S.U.B. 
and the reasoning of the Second District.  The Wisconsin Supreme Court held that 
damage to a warehouse caused by soil settlement, which was the result of a 
subcontractor’s inadequate site preparation, was an “occurrence” because 
“[n]either the cause nor the harm was intended, anticipated, or expected.”  Am. 
Girl, 673 N.W.2d at 76. 

 

- 22 -

breach of contract endorsement exclusion, not present in the CGL policies at issue 

in this case, that excludes coverage for breach of contract claims.  See B. Hall 

Contracting Inc. v. Evanston Ins. Co., 447 F. Supp. 2d 634, 639 (N.D. Tex. 2006).  

The endorsement provides: 

This insurance does not apply to claims for breach of contract, 
whether express or oral, nor claims for breach of an implied in law or 
implied in fact contract, whether “bodily injury,” “property damage,” 
“advertising injury,” “personal injury” or an “occurrence” or damages 
of any type is alleged; this exclusion also applies to any additional 
insureds under this policy. 

Id.     

 

Furthermore, ISO has begun to issue an endorsement that may be included in 

a CGL policy, which entirely eliminates the subcontractor exception to the “your 

work” exclusion.  See ISO Properties, Inc., Endorsement CG 22 94 10 01, 

http://www.lexis.com; see also Lamar Homes, Inc. v. Mid-Continent Cas. Co., 50 

Tex. Sup. Ct. J. 1162, 1168 (Tex. 2007) (“More recently, the Insurance Services 

Office has issued an endorsement that may be included in the CGL to eliminate the 

subcontractor exception to the ‘your work’ exclusion.”).  The fact that these 

additional endorsements may be included in CGL policies highlights that the 

ultimate analysis is governed by the actual language contained in the applicable 

insurance contract. 

 

U.S. Fire’s assertion that damage resulting from a breach of contract must be 

presumed to be expected is also unpersuasive.  As with U.S. Fire’s foreseeability 

 

- 23 -

argument, this position makes the definition of “occurrence” dependent on whether 

the property damaged is part of the construction contract or the homeowner’s 

separate property.  Under CTC Development, the appropriate consideration is 

whether the damage was expected or intended from the standpoint of the insured, 

not whose property was damaged.  720 So. 2d at 1076; see also Lamar Homes, 50 

Tex. Sup. Ct. J. at 1166 (“The CGL policy, however, does not define an 

‘occurrence’ in terms of the ownership or character of the property damaged by the 

act or event.  Rather, the policy asks whether the injury was intended or fortuitous, 

that is, whether the injury was an accident.”).  As the amici Florida Home Builders 

Association and National Association of Home Builders assert in arguing that CGL 

policies issued to their members do not distinguish between the property damaged 

for purposes of defining “occurrence”: 

If a defective masonry wall falls outward and damages a parked car, 
no one disputes the “occurrence” of “property damage,” but if it falls 
inward and damages the floor, the insurers label that a non-occurrence 
or not property damage.  Likewise, if the wall falls the day before the 
home buyer resells to a new owner, they contend it is not covered as a 
contract claim, but if it falls the day after resale, it is covered as a tort 
claim. 

(Citation omitted.) 
 

In sum, we reject a definition of “occurrence” that renders damage to the 

insured’s own work as a result of a subcontractor’s faulty workmanship expected, 

but renders damage to property of a third party caused by the same faulty 

 

- 24 -

workmanship unexpected.  There is simply nothing in the definition of the term 

“occurrence” that limits coverage in the manner advanced by U.S. Fire, and we 

decline to read the broad “business risk” exclusions at issue in LaMarche into the 

definition of “occurrence” used in the coverage provisions of the post-1986 

standard CGL policies at issue in this case.  We agree with the Wisconsin Supreme 

Court’s observation that  

CGL policies generally do not cover contract claims arising out of the 
insured’s defective work or product, but this is by operation of the 
CGL’s business risk exclusions, not because a loss actionable only in 
contract can never be the result of an “occurrence” within the meaning 
of the CGL’s initial grant of coverage.  This distinction is sometimes 
overlooked, and has resulted in some regrettably overbroad 
generalizations about CGL policies in our case law. 
 

Am. Girl, 673 N.W.2d at 76; accord Moore & Assocs., 216 S.W.2d at 307 

(agreeing with American Girl that “[r]eliance upon a CGL’s ‘exclusions’ to 

determine the meaning of ‘occurrence’ has resulted in ‘regrettably overbroad 

generalizations’ concerning CGLs”).     

Although the Supreme Courts of Kansas, Minnesota, Tennessee, Texas and 

Wisconsin have adopted a similar interpretation of the term “occurrence” as we do 

in this case, we recognize that there is an opposing view that defective construction 

that damages the work product itself can never constitute an accident.  See, e.g., 

Auto-Owners Ins. Co. v. Home Pride Cos., 684 N.W.2d 571, 577 (Neb. 2004); Oak 

Crest Constr. Co. v. Austin Mut. Ins. Co., 998 P.2d 1254, 1257 (Ore. 2000); 

 

- 25 -

Kvaerner Metals Div. of Kvaerner U.S., Inc. v. Commercial Union Ins. Co., 908 

A.2d 888, 899 (Pa. 2006); L-J, Inc. v. Bituminous Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 621 

S.E.2d 33, 35-36 (S.C. 2005). 9   However, contrary to our interpretation of the term 

“accident” in CTC Development, these courts construe “accident” narrowly.  See 

Home Pride Cos., 684 N.W.2d at 577 (concluding that faulty workmanship is not 

an “accident” because it is not a fortuitous event); Kvaerner Metals, 908 A.2d at 

899 (same); Oak Crest, 998 P.2d at 1257 (concluding that faulty workmanship is 

not an “occurrence” because it is a failure to perform under the contract, which 

cannot be characterized as unexpected); L-J, Inc., 621 S.E.2d at 35 (same).  

Moreover, a number of these courts support their decisions by reciting broad 

                                           
 
9.  The Kansas Supreme Court explained that there are two different views 
reflected in the nationwide case law regarding whether defective construction can 
constitute an accident:  
 

[O]ne line of cases has held that faulty or improper construction does 
not constitute an accident; rather, the damage is the natural and 
ordinary consequence of the insured’s act.  The other line of cases has 
held that improper or faulty construction does constitute an accident 
as long as the resulting damage is an event that occurs without the 
insured’s expectation or foresight.  

Lee Builders, 137 P.3d at 491.  These two opposing views of the term “accident” 
are repeated by U.S. Fire and J.S.U.B. as well as the numerous amicus briefs filed 
in support of the parties.  There are also law review articles that advocate both 
sides of the issue.  Compare Clifford J. Shapiro, Point/Counterpoint: Inadvertent 
Construction Defects Are an “Occurrence” under CGL Policies, Construction Law. 
Spring 2002, at 13, with Linda B. Foster, Point/Counterpoint: No Coverage Under 
the CGL Policy for Standard Construction Defect Claims, Construction Law. 
Spring 2002, at 22.  

 

- 26 -

principles that categorically dismiss claims for damages caused by defective work 

as being outside the scope of CGL policies.  See, e.g., Oak Crest, 998 P.2d at 1257 

n.7; Kvaerner Metals, 908 A.2d at 899 n.10; L-J, Inc., 621 S.E.2d at 35.  Because 

these courts allow recovery when the faulty workmanship injures a third party or 

results in damage to property other than the work product itself, the implication 

from these cases is that damage to the insured’s own work from failure to perform 

a construction contract is presumed to be expected while damage to the person or 

property of a third party is presumed to be unexpected.  As explained above, we 

find this reasoning unconvincing and contrary to policy language defining 

“occurrence.”   

Even if there was any ambiguity in the policies as to whether a 

subcontractor’s faulty workmanship can constitute an “occurrence,” we would 

interpret the ambiguity against the insurer and in favor of coverage.  See Taurus 

Holdings, 913 So. 2d at 532.  In addition, our interpretation of the term 

“occurrence” is guided by a view of the policy as a whole.  See Anderson, 756 So. 

2d at 34.  As we explained in CTC Development, “[a]lthough exclusionary clauses 

cannot be relied upon to create coverage, principles governing the construction of 

insurance contracts dictate that when construing an insurance policy to determine 

coverage the pertinent provisions should be read in pari materia.”  720 So. 2d at 

1074-75 (citations, alteration, and internal quotation marks omitted).   

 

- 27 -

In this case, if the insuring provisions do not confer an initial grant of 

coverage for faulty workmanship, there would be no reason for U.S. Fire to 

exclude damage to “your work”:      

If . . . losses actionable in contract are never CGL 
“occurrences” for purposes of the initial coverage grant, then the 
business risk exclusions are entirely unnecessary.  The business risk 
exclusions eliminate coverage for liability for property damage to the 
insured’s own work or product-liability that is typically actionable 
between the parties pursuant to the terms of their contract, not in tort.  
If the insuring agreement never confers coverage for this type of 
liability as an original definitional matter, then there is no need to 
specifically exclude it. Why would the insurance industry exclude 
damage to the insured’s own work or product if the damage could 
never be considered to have arisen from a covered “occurrence” in the 
first place? 

Am. Girl, 673 N.W.2d at 78; accord Lamar Homes, Inc., 50 Tex. Sup. Ct. J. at 

1168 (“By incorporating the subcontractor exception into the ‘your-work’ 

exclusion, the insurance industry specifically contemplated coverage for property 

damage caused by a subcontractor’s defective performance.”)   

In addition, a construction of the insuring agreement that precludes recovery 

for damage caused to the completed project by the subcontractor’s defective work 

renders the “products-completed operations hazard” exception to exclusion (j)(6) 

and the subcontractor exception to exclusion (l) meaningless.  See Lee Builders, 

137 P.3d at 494 (stating that “the ‘Damage to Your Work’ business risk exclusion 

in the CGL policy in the instant case supports the determination of an occurrence” 

because “[i]f there can be no occurrence, the exclusion—and its exception—appear 

 

- 28 -

to be superfluous”); Lennar Corp. v. Great Am. Ins. Co., 200 S.W.3d 651, 673 

(Tex. App. 2006) (“[F]inding no occurrence for defective construction resulting in 

damage to the insured’s work would render the subcontractor exception 

superfluous and meaningless.”), petition for review filed, No. 06-287 (Tex. May 

11, 2006). 10   Paragraph (j)(6) specifically excludes from coverage that “particular 

part of any property that must be restored, repaired or replaced because ‘your 

work’ was incorrectly performed on it.”  However, the policy goes on to provide 

an exception by stating that “[p]aragraph (6) of this exclusion does not apply to 

‘property damage’ included in the ‘products-completed operations hazard.’”  

Exclusion (l) excludes damage to “‘your work’ arising out of it or any part of it and 

included in the ‘products-completed operations-hazard’” but then provides an 

exception that states that this “exclusion does not apply if the damaged work or the 

work out of which the damage arises was performed on your behalf by a 

subcontractor.”  (Emphasis supplied.)  We simply cannot ignore the exception that 

has now been incorporated into exclusion (l), an exception that clearly applies to 

damages to the insured’s own work arising out of the work of a subcontractor.  

Reading these provisions in pari materia with the insuring agreement supports the 

                                           
 
10.  Although the petition for review in Lennar Corp. is still pending in the 
Texas Supreme Court and a final disposition has not been released, the Court’s 
decision in Lamar Homes, Inc. appears to resolve the pending issue.  However, we 
note that the Court did not specifically approve of the decision in Lamar Homes, 
Inc.  

 

- 29 -

conclusion that a subcontractor’s defective work that results in damage to the 

completed project can constitute an “occurrence.” 

 

Finally, we reject U.S. Fire’s contention that construing the term 

“occurrence” to include a subcontractor’s defective work converts the policies into 

performance bonds.  “The purpose of a performance bond is to guarantee the 

completion of the contract upon default by the contractor.”  Am. Home Assur. Co. 

v. Larkin Gen. Hosp., Ltd., 593 So. 2d 195, 198 (Fla. 1992).  Thus, unlike an 

insurance policy, a performance bond benefits the owner of a project rather than 

the contractor.  Cf. School Bd. of Palm Beach County v. Vincent J. Fasano, Inc., 

417 So. 2d 1063, 1065 n.3 (Fla. 4th DCA 1982) (“On private construction projects 

performance bonds are usually secured for the benefit of the owner . . . .”).  

Further, a surety, unlike a liability insurer, is entitled to indemnification from the 

contractor.  See Western World Ins. Co. v. Travelers Indem. Co., 358 So. 2d 602, 

604 (Fla. 1st DCA 1978); see also Fidelity & Deposit Co. of Md. v. Hartford Cas. 

Ins. Co., 189 F. Supp. 2d 1212, 1218 (D. Kan. 2002) (rejecting the argument that 

“if the structural damage caused by faulty workmanship constitutes an 

‘occurrence,’ then the CGL and umbrella policies will be transformed into a 

performance bond” because the bond “in no way” protected the contractor or 

subcontractor from liability).   

The Texas Court of Appeals explained the salient differences between a 

 

- 30 -

liability policy and a performance bond: 

[A]lthough defective construction may constitute an “occurrence,” the 
insurer indemnifies the insured only for resulting “property damage” 
arising after the project is completed.  In contrast, a performance bond 
is broader than a CGL policy in that it guarantees “the completion of a 
construction contract upon the default of the general contractor.”   
Therefore, a “variety of deficiencies that do not constitute ‘property 
damage’ may be covered by a performance bond, and not all 
deficiencies cause additional property damage.”  Consequently, 
allowing coverage for some “property damage” resulting from 
defective construction does not transform a CGL policy into a 
performance bond and require a CGL carrier to pay anytime an 
insured fails to complete, or otherwise comply with, its contract. 
 
 
Lennar Corp., 200 S.W.3d at 673-74 (footnote and citations omitted) (quoting 

Black’s Law Dictionary 1158 (7th ed. 1999) and O’Shaughnessy v. Smuckler 

Corp., 543 N.W.2d 99, 105 (Minn. Ct. App. 1996)); accord Lamar Homes, Inc., 50 

Tex. Sup. Ct. J. at 1167 & n.7 (“[T]he protection afforded by a performance bond 

is, in fact, different from that provided by [a] CGL insurance policy . . . .  [A]n 

insurance policy spreads the contractor’s risk while a bond guarantees its 

performance. An insurance policy is issued based on an evaluation of risks and 

losses that is actuarially linked to premiums; that is, losses are expected.  In 

contrast, a surety bond is underwritten based on what amounts to a credit 

evaluation of the particular contractor and its capabilities to perform its contracts, 

with the expectation that no losses will occur.  Unlike insurance, the performance 

bond offers no indemnity for the contractor; it protects only the owner.”).  The 

Supreme Court of Tennessee also rejected this argument, recognizing that the fact 

 

- 31 -

that damages may result from an “occurrence” under a CGL policy is only the first 

step in determining whether the damages are covered.  Moore & Assocs., 216 S.W. 

2d at 309.  The “occurrence” may not have caused “property damage” or coverage 

provided by the insuring agreement may be precluded by an exclusion.     

 

We hold that faulty workmanship that is neither intended nor expected from 

the standpoint of the contractor can constitute an “accident” and, thus, an 

“occurrence” under a post-1986 CGL policy.  In this case, we conclude that the 

subcontractors’ defective soil preparation, which J.S.U.B. did not intend or expect, 

was an “occurrence.”  However, in order to determine whether the policies provide 

coverage for J.S.U.B.’s losses, we must next address whether the “occurrence” 

caused “property damage” within the meaning of the policies.       

E.  Whether the Subcontractors’ Improper Soil Preparation Caused  
“Property Damage”  

 
 

The CGL policies define “property damage” as “[p]hysical injury to tangible 

property, including all resulting loss of use of that property.”  U.S. Fire and the 

amici that argue in favor of its position assert that faulty workmanship that injures 

only the work product itself does not result in “property damage.”  However, just 

like the definition of the term “occurrence,” the definition of “property damage” in 

the CGL policies does not differentiate between damage to the contractor’s work 

 

- 32 -

and damage to other property. 11   

 

We further reject U.S. Fire’s contention that there can never be “property 

damage” in cases of faulty construction because the defective work rendered the 

entire project damaged from its inception.  To the contrary, faulty workmanship or 

defective work that has damaged the otherwise nondefective completed project has 

caused “physical injury to tangible property” within the plain meaning of the 

definition in the policy.  If there is no damage beyond the faulty workmanship or 

defective work, then there may be no resulting “property damage.”   

Both the Third and Fifth District Courts of Appeal have recognized this 

distinction.  See West Orange Lumber Co. v. Indiana Lumbermens Mut. Ins. Co., 

898 So. 2d 1147, 1148 (Fla. 5th DCA 2005); Auto Owners Ins. Co. v. Tripp 

Constr., Inc., 737 So. 2d 600, 601 (Fla. 3d DCA 1999).  In Tripp, although the 

Third District cited LaMarche, the court differentiated between a claim for the 

costs of repairing and replacing the actual defects in the construction, which it held 

was not covered, and a claim for the costs of repairing the damage caused by 

                                           
 
11.  U.S. Fire’s reliance on the economic loss doctrine to support its position 
is unconvincing.  “The economic loss rule is a judicially created doctrine that sets 
forth the circumstances under which a tort action is prohibited if the only damages 
suffered are economic losses.”  Indemnity Ins. Co. of N.Am. v. Am. Aviation, Inc., 
891 So. 2d 532, 536 (Fla. 2004).  Thus, the economic loss doctrine determines 
what cause of action is available to recover economic losses—tort or contract—but 
not whether an insurance policy covers a claim, which depends on the policy 
language.  As explained above, we find no language in the CGL policies that limits 
coverage to tort claims.      

 

- 33 -

construction defects “to other elements of the subject homes,” which it held was 

covered.  737 So. 2d at 601-02.  In West Orange, the Fifth District held that there 

was no allegation of “property damage” when the only damage alleged was the 

cost of removing and replacing the wrong grade cedar siding that had been 

installed.  898 So. 2d at 1148.  

 

Other courts have also recognized that there is a difference between a claim 

for the costs of repairing or removing defective work, which is not a claim for 

“property damage,” and a claim for the costs of repairing damage caused by the 

defective work, which is a claim for “property damage.”  See, e.g., Cincinnati Ins. 

Co. v. Venetian Terrazzo, Inc., 198 F. Supp. 2d 1074, 1079 n.1 (E.D. Mo. 2001) 

(concluding that costs of repair and replacement of an improperly installed floor 

was not covered “property damage”); Lennar Corp., 200 S.W.3d at 679-80 

(distinguishing between costs to remove and replace defective stucco as a 

preventative measure, which were not “damages because of . . . property damage,” 

and the costs to repair water damage that resulted from the application of the 

defective stucco, which were “damages because of . . . property damage”).  As the 

Supreme Court of Tennessee explained: 

[A] “claim limited to faulty workmanship or materials” is one in 
which the sole damages are for replacement of a defective component 
or correction of faulty installation.   
We conclude that Hilcom’s claim is not limited to faulty 
workmanship and does in fact allege “property damage.”  Moore’s 
subcontractor allegedly installed the windows defectively.  Without 

 

- 34 -

more, this alleged defect is the equivalent of the “mere inclusion of a 
defective component” such as the installation of a defective tire, and 
no “property damage” has occurred.  The alleged water penetration is 
analogous to the automobile accident that is caused by the faulty tire.  
Because the alleged defective installation resulted in water penetration 
causing further damage, Hilcom has alleged “property damage.”  
Therefore, we conclude that Hilcom has alleged damages that 
constitute “property damage” for purposes of the CGL. 

 
Moore & Assocs., 216 S.W.3d at 310; see also Am. Girl, 673 N.W.2d at 74-75 

(“The sinking, buckling, and cracking of the [warehouse] as a result of soil 

settlement qualifies as ‘physical injury to tangible property.’”). 

 

Like the Tennessee case, Moore & Assocs., and the Wisconsin case, 

American Girl, this case does not involve a claim for the cost of repairing the 

subcontractor’s defective work, but rather a claim for repairing the structural 

damage to the completed homes caused by the subcontractor’s defective work.  

Specifically, it was the subsequent soil settlement due to the subcontractor’s faulty 

workmanship that caused the structural damage to the homes.  Because there was 

“physical injury to tangible property,” we conclude that the structural damage to 

the homes is “property damage” within the meaning of the policies.      

 

In reaching this conclusion, we discern no public policy reason for 

precluding coverage.  A subcontractor’s defective work that is neither intended nor 

expected from the standpoint of the insured is not the type of intentional wrongful 

act that we have held was uninsurable as a matter of public policy.  See Ranger Ins. 

Co. v. Bal Harbour Club, Inc., 549 So. 2d 1005, 1009 (Fla. 1989) (holding that 

 

- 35 -

public policy prohibits the insured from being indemnified for a loss resulting from 

intentional employment discrimination).  Even if a “moral hazard” argument could 

be made regarding the contractor’s own work, the argument is not applicable for 

the subcontractors’ work: 

Providing coverage for claims arising out of the subcontractor work 
also made sense in terms of meeting the moral hazard and adverse 
selection problems associated with faulty workmanship claims. 
Although it may be unwise to provide liability coverage for a builder 
directing its own crews, who may be tempted to cut corners if insured, 
the same rationale did not as readily apply to modern construction that 
depends heavily on subcontractors on whom general contractors 
depend. . . .  Particularly if the subcontractor does soil, concrete, or 
framing work, it is as a practical matter very difficult for the general 
contractor to control the quality of the subcontractor work.  Only if 
the contractor has a supervisor at the elbow of each subcontractor at 
all times can quality control be relatively assured—but this would be 
prohibitively expensive.  Because the general contractor depends on 
the subcontractor to a large degree, the general contractor is not 
tempted by moral hazard to the degree that makes the consequences of 
faulty subcontractor work more expensive to insure. 

Stempel, supra, § 14.13[D], at 14-224.8.  Further, the argument that indemnity will 

create a windfall for the contractor is speculative.  As the amici point out, the 

contractor gains nothing if insurance reimburses the costs of repairing the damage 

caused by the defective work.  Moreover, if the insurer decides that this is a risk it 

does not want to insure, it can clearly amend the policy to exclude coverage, as can 

be done simply by either eliminating the subcontractor exception or adding a 

breach of contract exclusion.      

    

 

- 36 -

CONCLUSION 

 

We conclude that faulty workmanship that is neither intended nor expected 

from the standpoint of the contractor can constitute an “accident” and thus an 

“occurrence” under a post-1986 standard form CGL policy.  We further conclude 

that physical injury to the completed project that occurs as a result of the defective 

work can constitute “property damage” as defined in a CGL policy.  Accordingly, 

we hold that a post-1986 standard form commercial general liability policy with 

products completed-operations hazard coverage, issued to a general contractor, 

provides coverage for a claim made against the contractor for damage to the 

completed project caused by a subcontractor’s defective work provided that there 

is no specific exclusion that otherwise excludes coverage.  In so holding, we 

distinguish but do not recede from LaMarche because that case concluded, based 

on the policy exclusions, that there was no coverage under a pre-1986 CGL policy 

for the repair and replacement of the contractor’s own defective work.     

In this case, because there are no exclusions that bar coverage, we agree with 

the Second District’s conclusion that the CGL policies issued by U.S. Fire to 

J.S.U.B. provide coverage for the costs to replace the homeowner’s personal 

property, such as their wallpaper, as well as the costs to repair the structural 

damage to the homes, such as the walls, both of which were caused by the 

subcontractors’ improper soil preparation.  Accordingly, we approve the Second 

 

- 37 -

District’s decision in J.S.U.B. and disapprove the Fourth District’s decision in 

Lassiter to the extent that it held that CGL policies can never provide coverage for 

a claim made against the contractor for damage to the completed project caused by 

a subcontractor’s faulty workmanship.   

 

It is so ordered.     

ANSTEAD, QUINCE, and BELL, JJ., concur. 
LEWIS, C.J., concurs in result only with an opinion. 
WELLS, J., concurs in result only. 
CANTERO, J., recused. 
 
NOT FINAL UNTIL TIME EXPIRES TO FILE REHEARING MOTION, AND 
IF FILED, DETERMINED. 
 
 
LEWIS, C.J., concurring in result only. 

 

While I agree with the result reached by the majority, I cannot fully 

subscribe to the reasoning.  Sufficient ambiguity exists in these post-1986 

commercial general liability (“CGL”) policies to afford coverage for insured 

contractors whose work is damaged by subcontractor negligence.  See, e.g., State 

Farm Fire & Cas. Co. v. CTC Dev. Corp., 720 So. 2d 1072, 1076 (Fla. 1998) 

(“[W]here policy language is subject to differing interpretations, the term should 

be construed liberally in favor of the insured and strictly against the insurer.”).  

However, we must not overlook three major areas of concern with regard to 

emerging CGL jurisprudence.  First, when one is attempting to determine and 

define the coverage afforded by any given insurance policy, the type of policy at 

 

- 38 -

issue must remain a central and critical concern.  Second, courts, commentators, 

and parties to insurance contracts must remain wary of basing coverage 

determinations primarily upon the exclusions and exceptions within a contract, 

rather than upon the initial grant of coverage.  Third and finally, the original 

function and scope of CGL policies has been significantly altered, not by courts, 

commentators, or insureds, but by the insurance industry itself through drafting and 

marketing practices.  

 
 
 

THE TYPE OF POLICY AT ISSUE. 

It remains true that when an insurer fails to define a term in a policy, the 

insurer simply cannot validly assert that there should be a narrow and restrictive 

interpretation of the coverage provided under the contract.  See, e.g., State 

Comprehensive Health Ass’n v. Carmichael, 706 So. 2d 319, 320 (Fla. 4th DCA 

1997).  The coverage provided, however, must be gleaned in part from reference to 

the type of policy involved.  Here, it should be remembered that “a commercial 

general liability insurance policy is generally designed to provide coverage for tort 

liability for physical damages to others and not for contractual liability of the 

insured for economic loss because the product or work is not that for which the 

damaged person bargained.”  9A Lee R. Russ & Thomas F. Segalla, Couch on 

Insurance § 129:1 (3d ed. 2005) (emphasis supplied).   

 

- 39 -

I do not suggest that I agree with the decisions from other jurisdictions 

which hold that the defective work of subcontractors can never result in an 

“occurrence” under a CGL policy.  See, e.g., Auto-Owners Ins. Co. v. Home Pride 

Companies, Inc., 684 N.W.2d 571, 575-80 (Neb. 2004); L-J, Inc. v. Bituminous 

Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 621 S.E.2d 33, 35-36 (S.C. 2005).  Rather, I caution that 

CGL coverage claims for those things other than the originally intended tort 

liability to third parties should be viewed with a cautious and suspect eye.  See, 

e.g., 2 Jeffrey W. Stempel, Stempel on Insurance Contracts, § 14.01[B], at 14-17 

(3d ed. 2007) (“The CGL, like most insurance policies, has a relatively targeted 

objective for insuring risks.  It is designed to protect commercial operators from 

litigation and liability arising out of their business operations. . . .  [T]he CGL is 

not designed to guarantee the quality of the policyholder’s work or the successful 

completion of its business activities.” (emphasis supplied)).  Thus, in the 

interpretation of insurance policy language, as with the interpretation of any 

contract, one should remain cognizant of the type of policy or contract at issue and 

the type of coverage that is generally and naturally associated with such a policy.  

However, courts should only use interpretive tools to further the intent of the 

parties, not to usurp or contradict the language of the policy as written.  See, e.g., 

Discover Prop. & Cas. Ins. Co. v. Beach Cars of W. Palm, Inc., 929 So. 2d 729, 

732 (Fla. 4th DCA 2006).   

 

- 40 -

COVERAGE DETERMINATIONS SHOULD NOT BE MADE BASED 
UPON POLICY EXCLUSIONS. 
 
The policy-interpretation linguistic gymnastics that tend to occur in some 

jurisdictions across the country in CGL cases, which involve the so-called 

subcontractor exception to the your-work exclusion, walk a very thin line of falling 

into violations of the rule that “exclusionary clauses cannot be relied upon to create 

coverage.”  See, e.g., CTC, 720 So. 2d at 1074.  However, the insurance industry 

itself created the language which has necessitated much of this at times thin and 

often thought-provoking interpretation by drafting CGL forms in a fashion that has 

pushed insureds and courts to rely on language in the exclusions to give meaning 

to all the words in the policy and to decipher the coverage grants.  See, e.g., Am. 

Family Mut. Ins. Co. v. Am. Girl, Inc., 673 N.W.2d 65, 73 (Wis. 2004) (adopting a 

three-part approach to interpreting a CGL policy:  (1) examine the initial coverage 

grant to determine if “property damage” or “bodily injury” has resulted from an 

“occurrence”; (2) if “property damage” or “bodily injury” has occurred, examine 

the policy exclusions to see if the CGL policy’s otherwise broad coverage is 

thereby narrowed to exclude the claim; and finally (3) determine if any exceptions 

to applicable exclusions restore otherwise excluded coverage); Elmer W. Sawyer, 

Comprehensive Liability Insurance 11 (1943) (“[I]nstead of insuring against only 

enumerated hazards, we now insure against all hazards not excluded.” (emphasis 

supplied)).  Furthermore, the “Business-Risk Doctrine” or the “Historical Model” 

 

- 41 -

concept––the weapons upon which the insurance industry has generally relied to 

deny claims for faulty subcontractor work––simply do not appear anywhere in 

these post-1986 standard-form CGL policies, as demonstrated by the policy 

involved in J.S.U.B.  See, e.g., ISO Policy Form Number CG 00 01 07 98, 

http://www.lexis.com; see also James Duffy O’Connor, What Every Construction 

Lawyer Should Know About CGL Coverage for Defective Construction, Constr. 

Law., Winter 2001, at 15, 15-16 (explaining that the Business-Risk Doctrine or 

Historical Model cannot be used to rewrite the actual language of the policy); 4 

Philip L. Bruner & Patrick J. O’Connor, Jr., Bruner & O’Connor on Construction 

Law § 11:28 (2002 & Supp. 2007) (substantially similar).  These concepts should 

not be used to preclude coverage that the drafters of the policy intended and that 

insureds relied upon to justify paying additional premiums.  Courts should not use 

the “concepts” of the Business-Risk Doctrine and Historic Model to simply bar 

coverage, in lieu of examining the policies as written.  See Wanzek Constr., Inc. v. 

Employers Ins. of Wausau, 679 N.W.2d 322, 325-27 (Minn. 2004) (avoiding this 

interpretive problem by modifying Minnesota’s view of the Business-Risk 

Doctrine in light of the changed policy language present in post-1986 standard-

form CGL policies).   

It has become clear that if the insurance industry seeks to avoid further and 

expansive interpretations of its CGL policies, it must do a better job of more 

 

- 42 -

narrowly describing coverage and defining the type of “property damage,” “bodily 

injury,” and “occurrences” that it may intend these types of policies to cover, rather 

than adopting linguistic forms that tend to force courts to swim against the 

interpretive current by looking into the policy exclusions for answers to coverage 

questions to give meaning and life to all words utilized.  Thus, while I am hesitant 

to place as much emphasis on the policies’ exclusions and exceptions as does the 

majority, I certainly recognize that courts should not rely on ephemeral policy 

justifications when the actual language of the policy at issue and the parties’ 

admitted intent do not include or reflect these justifications.   

In these cases, this analysis leads me to the conclusion that we cannot simply 

rely on the Business-Risk Doctrine or Historical Model to deny the coverage 

claims of the insureds if neither the coverage grant nor the exclusions explain, 

reference, or use words to evidence these concepts in a manner that causes them to 

become controlling.  The situation this Court faces, while facially complex, is 

actually fairly straightforward.  The relevant CGL policy anticipates the 

“occurrence” of inadvertent (i.e., “neither expected nor intended”) events, which 

result in “property damage” or “bodily injury.” 12   The policies then fail to outline 

                                           
12.  Opinions which assert that these CGL policies’ definition of 
“occurrence” somehow excludes coverage for fortuitous damage caused by faulty 
subcontractor work fail to support that position with reference to the actual 
language of the policies.  See, e.g., L-J, Inc. v. Bituminous Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 
621 S.E.2d 33, 34, 35-36 (S.C. 2005) (without specifying which portions of a road 

 

- 43 -

the protections allegedly afforded as limited by the Business-Risk Doctrine or 

Historical Model, and the exclusions are ambiguous to the extent that we must find 

that they certainly do not exclude coverage for fortuitous damage that faulty 

subcontractor work causes to other portions of the completed project.  If insurers 

wish to exclude this type of “occurrence” in this context, the onus is on them––not 

the courts––to clearly express that intent through the CGL policies they issue.    

THE INSURANCE INDUSTRY HAS STRAYED FROM THE SCOPE 
OF COVERAGE ORIGINALLY PROVIDED BY CGL POLICIES. 
 
Prior to the 1970s, there was minimal debate with regard to an expansive 

scope of coverage provided by CGL policies.  Before that time, the wide-ranging 

consensus was that “[t]he coverage is for tort liability for physical damages to 

others and not for contractual liability of the insured for economic loss.”  Roger C. 

Henderson, Insurance Protection for Products Liability and Completed Operations–
                                                                                                                                        
project were completed by the subcontractors––who “perform[ed] most of the 
work”––court held that damage to the completed project did “not constitute an 
occurrence under a CGL policy”).  Focusing on the definition of “occurrence” does 
not explain how that definition excludes coverage ab initio for fortuitous damage 
caused by faulty subcontractor work.  Clearly, general contractors intend for 
subcontractors to complete their work, but they do not generally intend or 
anticipate that subcontractors will complete their work in a faulty manner, which 
later results in damage to the completed project.  Moreover, any damage caused by 
subcontractor work that the insured “intended” or “expected” is already excluded 
under the standard CGL policy, which undermines the position that finding 
coverage in these types of cases provides general contractors with an incentive to 
render shoddy construction work.  See, e.g., ISO Policy Form Number CG 00 01 
07 98, exclusion a. (“This insurance does not apply to ‘[b]odily injury’ or ‘property 
damage’ expected or intended from the standpoint of the insured.” (emphasis 
supplied; internal division omitted)). 

 

- 44 -

–What Every Lawyer Should Know, 50 Neb. L. Rev. 415, 441 (1971).  As I began 

my analysis of this case, that guiding principle directed my attention; however, it 

has become apparent that the insurance industry itself began to undermine that 

consensus, and maybe intentionally, in 1976 when it introduced the Broad Form 

Property Damage Endorsement (“BFPDE”), which altered the then-existing “your-

work” exclusions.  Specifically, the BFPDE extended coverage to general- 

contractor insureds for property damage caused by the work of their 

subcontractors, and decisions report that the industry has specifically 

acknowledged as much in its own publications.  See, e.g., Md. Cas. Co. v. Reeder, 

270 Cal. Rptr. 719, 725 (Cal. Ct. App. 1990) (“[T]he ISO explains the broad form 

endorsement is intended to ‘exclud[e] only damages caused by the named insured 

to his own work.  Thus, . . . [t]he insured would have coverage for damage to his 

work arising out of a subcontractor’s work [and] [t]he insured would have 

coverage for damage to a subcontractor’s work arising out of the subcontractor’s 

work.’ ” (emphasis supplied)); see also James T. Hendrick & James P. Wiezel, The 

New Commercial General Liability Forms – An Introduction and Critique, 36 

Fed’n Ins. & Corp. Couns. Q. 319, 360 (1986); National Underwriter Co., Fire, 

Casualty & Surety Bulletins, Public Liability Aa 16-17 (1993) (“FC&S Bulletin”). 

It appears that in 1986, the Insurance Services Office (“ISO”) issued the fifth 

major revision of the standard CGL policy form.  9A Russ & Segalla, supra § 

 

- 45 -

129:1.  As part of that revision, the ISO lifted the extended coverage provided by 

the BFPDE and directly incorporated it into the standard CGL policy in the form of 

the so-called subcontractor exception to the your-work exclusion.  See 21 Eric 

Mills Holmes, Holmes’ Appleman on Insurance § 132.9, 152-53 (2d ed. 2002).  As 

a direct result, the insurance industry continued to expand coverage for 

unintentional, contractual damages caused by subcontractors to the contractor-

insured’s completed project.  See, e.g., FC&S Bulletin Aa 16-17 (explaining that 

the ISO intended this exception to the your-work exclusion to provide coverage for 

damages caused to the insured-contractor’s completed work by the defective work 

of its subcontractors). 13 

Therefore, the scope of CGL policies has apparently been expanded to the 

extent that a CGL policy, which includes the subcontractor exception to the your-
                                           
13.  I represent a prime exponent that CGL policies were originally intended 
solely to cover damages that the insured’s operations caused to third parties’ 
persons or property.  However, there is substantial evidence, which I and the 
majority have noted, that the insurance industry itself altered this original intent by 
extending coverage––albeit in a convoluted fashion––to insureds for fortuitous 
damage caused to their completed projects by faulty subcontractor work.  Opinions 
that hold otherwise regarding standard-form post-1986 CGL policies do not 
address the evidence in this and other more recent CGL cases, which indicates that 
this extension of coverage, while inartfully executed, is exactly what the parties 
have accomplished––and intended to accomplish––by altering the your-work 
exclusions to no longer exclude the type of coverage disputed in these cases.  The 
law requires that we rely on the plain language of the policy’s coverage provision, 
the ambiguity of the exclusions, and the ample evidence of the parties’ intent to 
support the proposition that the policy does not clearly exclude otherwise-present 
coverage for fortuitous damage caused by faulty subcontractor work. 
 

 

- 46 -

work exclusion, is in operation actually now the equivalent of a warranty or 

product coverage that affords protection for the contractors’ product and work. 14   

Cf. Stempel, supra § 14.13[B], at 14-216 (“Performance bonds and CGL policies 

serve different purposes.  The performance bond ensures against claims for 

defective workmanship while the CGL insures for personal injury claims based on 

acts or omissions of the policyholder.  Courts are wary of permitting claimants or 

policyholders to receive CGL policy proceeds for what functionally are claims of 

defective construction . . . .” (emphasis supplied)).  It bears repeating, however, 

that traditional CGL policies were initially designed and intended to cover only tort 

liability for injuries sustained by third parties or their property, not contractual 

liability for products that fail to live up to the buyer’s expectations. 15   Moreover, 

                                           
14.  With the increasing probability that current construction practices will 
result in construction projects entirely completed by subcontractors, many 
distinctions between work and product protection and CGL policies that include 
the subcontractor exception may have disappeared.  The majority is correct that the 
owner-obligee is the direct beneficiary under a performance-bond type protection, 
but the same functional situation obtains when a disappointed owner sues a general 
contractor, who then requests coverage from its CGL insurer; the owner becomes 
the beneficiary of the CGL policy.  This too is counter to CGL policies’ original 
function, which was to provide tort-liability coverage for injuries caused to third 
parties’ persons and property.  However, this result appears to have been the intent 
of the parties due to the words of the contract and other supporting evidence. 
 
15.  Insurers attempt to draft coverage language with a degree of precision.  
Liability insurance is intended to insure the policyholder against the consequences 
of third-party claims, while other types of insurance have traditionally insured 
against different types of risks.  “To maintain this division of labor or 
compartmentalization, insurers draft liability policies with an eye toward 

 

- 47 -

ostensibly expanding the scope of coverage by altering the exclusions and 

exceptions present in a CGL policy, instead of amending the coverage grant, is 

counterintuitive from a policy or contract interpretation standpoint, but again, these 

changes were the result of the deliberate efforts of the insurance industry.   

I find this tortuous, indirect melding of the characteristics of different types 

of insurance coverages, performance bonds, and warranty-type protection to be 

somewhat inconsistent and inappropriate.  However, if the insurance industry now 

seeks to place blame or fault for the current conditions, it need only look in the 

mirror:  the industry has been a force in producing this apparent confusion, not the 

insureds and not the courts.  The ISO appears to have begun the clean-up process 

by providing an endorsement to the standard post-1986 CGL policy, which 

eliminates the subcontractor exception to the your-work exclusion.  See, e.g., 

Lamar Homes, Inc. v. Mid-Continent Cas. Co., No. 05-0832, 50 Tex. Sup. Ct. J. 

1162, 1168, 2007 WL 2459193, at *7 (Tex. Aug. 31, 2007).  The true resolution to 

a continuing saga of litigation “of words,” however, is clarity of terms in all 

aspects of contract and policy preparation.  The stacking of endorsements upon 

endorsements upon endorsements may or may not be the answer.  Unfortunately, I 

suspect the latter.  
                                                                                                                                        
preventing policyholders from obtaining first-party type protections from their 
liability insurance or converting their liability insurance into protection from 
nonfortuitous losses such as claims based on poor business operations.”  Stempel, 
supra § 14.13, at 14-211. 

 

- 48 -

for Petitioners 

for Respondents 

(Lee County) 

Second District - Case No. 2D03-134 

 
Application for Review of the Decision of the District Court of Appeal - Direct 
Conflict of Decisions 
 
 
 
 
 
Ronald L. Kammer and Sina Bahadoran of Hinshaw and Culbertson, LLP, Miami, 
Florida; June Galkoski Hoffman of Fowler, White, and Burnett, P.A., Miami, 
Florida; Joseph R. Miele, Jr. of Marshall, Dennehey, Warner, Coleman, and 
Goggin, Fort Lauderdale, Florida; and Donna M. Greenspan of Edwards, Angell, 
Palmer and Dodge, LLP, West Palm Beach, Florida, 
 
 
 
Mark A. Boyle, Sr., Michael G. Fink and Geoffrey H. Gentile, Sr. of Fink and 
Boyle, P.A., Fort Myers, Florida, 
 
 
 
Denise V. Powers, Coral Gables, Florida, on behalf of National Association of 
Mutual Insurance Companies; William D. Horgan of Fuller, Johnson, and Farrell, 
P.A., Tallahassee, Florida, on behalf of Complex Insurance Claims Litigation 
Association; Pamela A. Chamberlin of Mitrani, Rynor, and Adamsky, P.A., 
Miami, Florida, on behalf of Mid-Continent Casualty Company; John Bond 
Atkinson, Rebecca A. Brownell, and Ellie A. Levy of Atkinson and Brownell, 
P.A., Miami, Florida, and Shaun McParland Baldwin and Donald E. Elder of 
Tressler, Soderstrom, Maloney and Priess, Chicago, Illinois, on behalf of 
Amerisure Mutual Insurance Company; Perry N. Bass, Houston, Texas, and 
Christopher W. Martin and Levon G. Hovnatanian of Martin, Disiere, Jefferson 
and Wisdom, LLP, Houston, Texas, on behalf of Hartford Fire Insurance 
Company; and David K. Miller and Ginger L. Barry of Broad and Cassel, 
Tallahassee, Florida, and Keith Hetrick, Florida Home Builders Association, 
Tallahassee, Florida, and R. Hugh Lumpkin and Michael F. Huber of Ver Ploeg 
and Lumpkin, P.A., Miami, Florida, on behalf of Florida Home Builders 
Association, National Association of Home Builders, Arvida/JMB Partners, L.P., 
Arvida Managers, Inc., Arvida/JMB Management, L.P. and Mercedes Home 
Corporation; Warren H. Husband of Metz, Husband, and Daughton, P.A., 
Tallahassee, Florida, and Patrick J. Wielinski of Cokinos, Bosien, and Young, 

 

- 49 -

P.C., Arlington, Texas, on behalf of Associated General Contractors of America, 
Florida Associate General Contractors Council, Inc., the Associated General 
Contractors of Greater Florida, Inc., South Florida Chapter of the Associated 
General Contractors, Florida East Coast Chapter of the Associated General 
Contractors of America, Inc., American Subcontractors Association, Inc., and 
American Subcontractors of Florida, Inc.; Stephen A. Marino, Jr. of Ver Ploeg and 
Lumpkin, P.A., Miami, Florida, on behalf of the Academy of Florida Trial 
Lawyers; Duane A. Daiker and Steven G. Schember of Shumaker, Loop, and 
Kendrick, LLP, Tampa, Florida, on behalf of Amwest Surety Insurance Company; 
Daniel J. Santaniello and Paul Stephen Jones of Luks, Santaniello, Perez, Petrillo, 
and Gold, Orlando, Florida, James P. Waczewski of Luks, Santaniello, Perez, 
Petrillo and Gold, Tallahassee, Florida, and Joseph L. Oliva of Oliva and 
Associates, ALC, San Diego, California, on behalf of Poole and Kent Company, 
 
 
 
 

As Amici Curiae 

 

- 50 -

