No. 04-853

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF MONTANA

2005 MT 322

POINT SERVICE CORPORATION, a Montana
nonprofit corporation,

Plaintiff, Counterclaim Defendant 
and Respondent, 

v.

WILLIAM G. MYERS, JR.,

Defendant, Counterclaimant, 
Third-Party Plaintiff and Appellant. 

v.

STEVE KAMERICK, et al.,

Third-Party Defendants and Respondents.

APPEAL FROM:

District Court of the Twentieth Judicial District, 
In and For the County of Lake, Cause No.  DV 99–12 
Honorable C. B. McNeil, Presiding Judge

COUNSEL OF RECORD:

For Defendant/Counterclaimant/Third-Party Plaintiff/ Appellant William G. Myers, Jr.: 

James C. Bartlett, Attorney at Law, Kalispell, Montana

For Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant/Respondent Point Service Corporation:

Keith McCurdy, Attorney at Law, Polson, Montana

For Third-Party Defendant/Respondent Steve Kamerick:

Kristine J Beal, Timothy S. Peck; Phillips & Bohyer, P.C., Missoula, Montana

Submitted on Briefs:  September 6, 2005
       Decided:  December 20, 2005  

Filed:

__________________________________________
Clerk

Chief Justice Karla M. Gray delivered the Opinion of the Court.

¶1

Point Service Corporation  (PSC)  sued William G. Myers,  Jr.,  to prevent him  from

maintaining various public and private nuisances and from renting his home in a subdivision

for terms of less than 30 days.  Myers added a third-party claim to the action, accusing Steve

Kamerick of battery.  After a bench trial, the Twentieth Judicial District Court, Lake County,

granted  injunctive  relief  against  Myers  and  dismissed  Myers’  claim  against  Kamerick.

Myers appeals from certain portions of the judgment entered.  We affirm in part and reverse

in part.

¶2 We address the following dispositive issues:

¶3

1.   Did the District Court err in concluding that PSC acted lawfully in enacting  the

fifth amendment to the restrictive covenants?

¶4

2.  Are the District Court’s findings concerning the altercation between Kamerick and

Myers clearly erroneous, and are its conclusions incorrect? 

Because we determine, under Issue 1, that the fifth amendment to the restrictive covenants

is not valid and the District Court’s judgment must be reversed in that regard, we need not

address related issues Myers presents in the event we affirm on that issue. 

¶5 We observe that the bulk of PSC’s brief sets forth facts and arguments on what it calls

its  six  “Issues.”    To  the  extent  these  “Issues”  seek  review  of  matters  distinct  from  those

raised by Myers, we do not consider them because PSC did not  file a cross-appeal in  this

2

cause number.  See, e.g., Colmore v. Uninsured Employers’ Fund, 2005 MT 239, ¶ 39, 328

Mont. 441, ¶ 39, 121 P.3d 1007, ¶ 39 (citation omitted).

BACKGROUND

¶6

Myers purchased a home and lot in the Edmiston Point subdivision in Lake County,

Montana, in 1990.  Since then, he has advertised and rented his home to others for various

periods of time, including week-to-week.  

¶7

Edmiston Point property owners have adopted and filed restrictive covenants and, in

1968, also formed PSC, a non-profit corporation whose membership consists of all owners

of  property  in  the  subdivision.   PSC’s  articles of  incorporation  authorize  it  to  enforce  the

restrictive  covenants  and  to  promulgate  rules  and  regulations  for  the  use  of  the  common

ground facilities in the subdivision.

¶8

 PSC filed its original complaint in this action in February of 1999, alleging Myers’

actions are in willful violation of the restrictive covenants’ prohibition of use of lots “for any

purpose  other  than  single  family  residential  use”  and  of  PSC’s  rules  for  managing  the

common ground facilities, which do not allow persons who rent property in the subdivision

for less than 30 days to use those facilities.   PSC later amended the complaint by adding a

count alleging Myers has maintained a nuisance at his property by playing loud music and

placing an outdoor light so that it shines into the homes of his neighbors.  

¶9

  In June of 2001, PSC amended its complaint again, adding a claim that Myers’ week-

to-week  rentals  violate  the  fifth  amendment  to  the  restrictive  covenants.    The  fifth

amendment, dated June 1, 2000, modified the definition of single family “residential” use--

3

the only use  allowed within  the  subdivision--to  specifically  exclude property  rented  for  a

term of less than 30 days.  The fifth amendment also added a requirement that rental signs

within the subdivision must state that a rental cannot be for fewer than 30 days.

¶10 During  a  five-day  bench  trial,  PSC  members  testified  and  presented  documentary

evidence  concerning  the  subdivision’s  restrictive  covenants  and  PSC’s  regulations.    A

Realtor® testified that, in her expert opinion, rentals for less than 30 days changed the nature

of the use of Myers’ premises from residential to commercial, and would tend to lower the

value of other homes in the neighborhood.  Residents of a home adjacent to Myers’ testified

Myers’ renters trespassed on their property, hung many towels on the porch railing of Myers’

home,   were  noisy  early  in  the  morning  and  late  at  night,  and  parked  too  many  vehicles

outside Myers’ house.  The neighbors also testified they were bothered by light coming into

their bedroom from Myers’ mercury vapor yard light and by loud music he played while he

was working outdoors on his property.   Other subdivision residents testified Myers spit at

them,  set  his  lawn  sprinkler  so  that  it  sprayed  water  on  vehicles  as  they  drove  into  the

subdivision, gave “the one-finger salute” to several neighbors, and pulled down his pants and

“mooned” one couple as they drove past his house. 

¶11

 During PSC’s case-in-chief and over its objection that the issue had not been timely

raised, Myers’  counsel cross-examined PSC witnesses regarding details of the process by

which  the  fifth  amendment  to  the  Edmiston  Point  restrictive  covenants  was  adopted.

Specifically, he questioned PSC’s secretary and Edmiston Point residents as to the form in

which title to their lots was held, who gave formal written approval to the fifth amendment

4

on behalf of  their lots, and where and before whom that approval was given.   The District

Court, agreeing with PSC that Myers had not raised the issue in the pretrial order, admitted

the evidence only “to preserve [Myers’] record on his offer of proof.”  

¶12 Regarding enforcement of the fifth amendment and other subdivision covenants and

regulations, Myers testified, as did several other witnesses on his behalf, that the residents

of  Edmiston  Point  had  unfairly  singled  him  out  as  a  violator.   Myers  also  testified--with

regard  to  his  third-party  claim--about  an  altercation  he  had  with  Steve  Kamerick  in

September of 2000.  Myers told the court that he was removing wheelbarrow loads of sticks

and  brush  from  his  property  and  depositing  them  in  a  part  of  the  common  area  where

subdivision residents sometimes burned refuse.  Myers testified that, after he returned to his

property,  Kamerick  came  onto  the  property  and  punched  him  in  the  face,  injuring  him.

Myers  also  produced  a  witness  who  testified  he  observed  the  altercation  and  essentially

supported Myers’ version of the events.  

¶13 Kamerick,  in  turn, presented  a different version of  the  altercation.   He  testified  he

observed Myers dumping the sticks and brush in the common area.  He believed Myers knew

it was not the proper season for leaving brush piles there, picked up some of the sticks Myers

had  dumped  and  approached  Myers,  who  by  then  had  returned  to  his  own  property.

Kamerick  testified that, when he stepped onto Myers’ property, Myers rushed toward him

and he merely  attempted  to defuse  the  situation, unintentionally hitting Myers  in  the  face

with some of the sticks or his hand.  Kamerick also produced evidence that Myers’ witness

5

could not have seen the altercation because of trees between his stated point of observation

and the location of the altercation. 

¶14

The District Court entered extensive findings of fact and conclusions of law, including

a  conclusion  that  PSC  acted  lawfully  in  amending  the  covenants  by  enacting  the  fifth

amendment.   Ultimately, the court enjoined Myers from renting his property on Edmiston

Point for periods of less than 30 days; from “encouraging his tenants to disregard the rules

governing  the use of  the  common ground  facilities;”  and  from violating  the  subdivision’s

restrictive  covenants  and  amended  covenants.    The  trial  court  also  enjoined  Myers  from

continuing public and private nuisances--including playing loud continuous music, placing

his lawn sprinkler so that it sprays passing vehicles, making “mono-digit obscene gestures”

toward subdivision residents, using profanity, and spitting at and “mooning” neighbors.   The

court ordered Myers to immediately remove his mercury vapor light or relocate and shield

it so that it shines only on his property, and dismissed Myers’ battery claim against Kamerick

with prejudice.  

¶15 Myers  appeals  only  from  the District Court’s  injunction  against  his week-to-week

rentals and from the dismissal of his claim against Kamerick.  

ISSUE 1

¶16 Did the District Court err in concluding that PSC acted lawfully in enacting the fifth

amendment to the restrictive covenants?

¶17 Myers offered evidence at trial that the fifth amendment to the restrictive covenants

was not approved by a sufficient number of Edmiston Point lot owners because of a variety

6

of problems with some of the signatures; on this basis, he contended the fifth amendment

was not properly enacted.   PSC objected, contending the issue had not been  raised by  the

pleadings or preserved by Myers’ contentions in the pretrial order.  The District Court ruled

the  issue  had  not  been  preserved  in  the  pretrial  order,  but  allowed  Myers  to  present  his

evidence to “preserve his record on his offer of proof.”  

¶18 Myers asserts on appeal:  (1) that he properly preserved the issue of the validity of the

signatures approving the amendment in the pretrial order, and (2) that his offered proof that

the  amendment was  improperly  enacted  renders  it unenforceable.   We  review  a  ruling on

whether offered evidence is within the scope of the issues presented in the pretrial order for

abuse of discretion.   See Lopez v. Josephson, 2001 MT 133, ¶¶ 14, 21, 305 Mont. 446, ¶¶

14,  21,  30  P.3d  326,   ¶¶  14,  21.    We  review  questions  of  law,  such  as  whether  the  fifth

amendment  was  properly  enacted,  to  determine  whether  the  trial  court’s  conclusions  are

correct.  See, e.g., Public Lands Access Ass'n, Inc. v. Jones, 2004 MT 394, ¶ 27, 325 Mont.

236, ¶ 27, 104 P.3d 496, ¶ 27 (citation omitted).  

¶19 A  legal  theory  or  factual  issue  for  trial must be  “at  least  implicitly  included  in  the

pretrial order;” however, pretrial orders should be liberally construed to permit any issues

at trial that are “embraced within [their] language.” Plath v. Schonrock, 2003 MT 21, ¶ 55,

314 Mont. 101, ¶ 55, 64 P.3d 984, ¶ 55; Nentwig v. United Industry (1992), 256 Mont. 134,

139, 845 P.2d 99, 102 (citation omitted).   In the pretrial order in this case, PSC contended

that the fifth amendment to the restrictive covenants prohibited Myers from renting his home

for less than 30  days at a time.  Myers responded by stating he denied all allegations by PSC

7

“except  as  may  be  stated  herein”  and  that  PSC  “must  be  put  to  its  proof.”    Myers  also

contended  that  covenants  “must  be  reasonable  and  comply  with  due  process  of  law,

substantively and procedurally” and that the fifth amendment to the covenants was “arbitrary,

unreasonable, capricious and denied [him] due process of law[.]”    In addition, the pretrial

order contains, as an “issue of law,” the question of whether PSC acted lawfully in amending

the restrictive covenants.   

¶20

PSC provides no authority under which Myers was required to do more than he did

to place the validity of the fifth amendment at issue at trial.  The validity of the amendment

was, at the very least, “implicitly included in the pretrial order.”  See Plath, ¶ 55.  Moreover,

the purpose of a pretrial order is to simplify the issues, permit counsel to prepare for trial and

prevent unfair surprise.   See Lopez, ¶ 18 (citation omitted).   As to the surprise claimed by

PSC,  the  record  includes discussion  regarding Myers’  counsel’s  questioning of Edmiston

Point  residents  during  their  depositions  about  the  form/entities  in  which  title  to  their

Edmiston Point lots was held.  This discussion substantially undermines PSC’s claim that the

issue was a surprise first raised at trial.

¶21 We conclude Myers adequately preserved for trial the issue of the validity of the fifth

amendment  to  the  restrictive  covenants  and,  therefore,  that  the  District  Court  abused  its

discretion in failing to admit Myers’ evidence for consideration on the merits.  In the usual

case,  a  determination  that  a  trial  court  abused  its  discretion  in  admitting  or  excluding

evidence would result in a remand for further proceedings.  See, e.g., Mickelson v. Montana

Rail Link, Inc., 2000 MT 111, ¶ 47, 299 Mont. 348, ¶ 47, 999 P.2d 985, ¶ 47; Unmack v.

8

Deaconess Medical Center, 1998 MT 262, ¶¶ 14, 17, 291 Mont. 280, ¶¶ 14, 17, 967 P.2d

783, ¶¶ 14, 17.  In the present case, however, PSC does not request a remand in the event we

reverse the District Court’s evidentiary determination, instead choosing to stand or fall on

its assertion that this issue was not adequately preserved for trial.  Nor did PSC assert in the

District Court that the evidence contained in Myers’ offer of proof was incorrect.   Therefore,

under these unique circumstances, we address the merits of Myers’ argument that the fifth

amendment is invalid. 

¶22

The Edmiston Point restrictive covenants expressly provide for their amendment only

“by the recording of a written declaration of amendment executed by the owners of more

than  65%  of  the  lots  and  duly  acknowledged.”    Myers  contends  the  fifth  amendment  is

invalid because  the  signatories  to  the  amendment do not  actually  represent  the owners of

more  than  65%  of  the  42  lots,  or  at  least  28  lot  owners.   Although  PSC  claimed  to  have

obtained consent to the fifth amendment from the owners of 32 lots, Myers challenged the

signatures as to 18 of those lots. 

¶23 Myers offered evidence at trial that individuals had signed as  the owners of several

lots in which title was actually held by a corporation or family trust.  He elicited witnesses’

admissions that Lots 9 and 10 were owned by the Roecks Family Trust, which did not sign;

Lot 12 was owned by the Savall 1983 Trust, which did not sign; Lots 13 and 14 were owned

by  Woods  Bay  Properties,  Ltd.,  which  did  not  sign;  Lot  21  was  owned  by  the  Eldridge

Family Trust, which did not sign; and Lot 28 was owned by Stage Ridge, Inc., which did not

sign.   PSC produced nothing to indicate that the individuals who signed for those  lots had

9

authority to sign on behalf of the respective trust or corporate owners of the lots.  Myers also

established  that  the  signature of  the owner of Lots 3, 4  and 5 was not  acknowledged.     In

addition, he established that the signature for Lot 15 was for a general partnership and the

signature for Lots 17, 18, 19 and 20 was for a corporation, but neither notarization was  in

the proper form for an acknowledgment in a representative capacity, as required by § 1-5-

610(2), MCA.  Finally, Myers established that the notarizations on the signature pages for

Lots 24, 25 and 34 were signed in a county other than the county shown, showed an incorrect

year or failed to show the state and county in which the signature was notarized.

¶24 Restrictive  covenants must be  strictly  construed.   Bordas  v. Virginia City Ranches

Ass'n, 2004 MT 342, ¶ 15,  324 Mont. 263, ¶ 15, 102 P.3d 1219, ¶ 15 (citation omitted).   

As a result, when covenants are amended so as to impose an impediment on use of property,

we conclude  the method prescribed for amending the covenants must be strictly followed.

Myers  established  the  prescribed  method  for  amending  the  covenants  was  not  strictly

followed as to 18 of the 32 lot owners PSC claims authorized the fifth amendment, reducing

the  percentage  of  lot  owners  who  actually  authorized  that  amendment  to  well  below  the

necessary 65%.  For that reason, we hold that the District Court erred in concluding that PSC

acted lawfully in enacting the fifth amendment to the Edmiston Point restrictive covenants.

¶25 We reverse the District Court’s conclusion that PSC acted lawfully in amending the

covenants by enacting the fifth amendment.  As a result, we conclude the District Court erred

in entering judgment that the fifth amendment prohibits Myers from renting his premises for

10

periods of  less than 30 days and, on that basis, in enjoining him from renting the property

for lesser periods of time.

  

ISSUE 2

¶26 Are the District Court’s findings concerning the altercation between Kamerick and

Myers clearly erroneous and are its conclusions incorrect?

¶27 A person  is  liable  to  another  for battery  if  (a)  the  person  acts  intending  to  cause  a

harmful or offensive contact with another, or an imminent apprehension of such a contact,

and (b) a harmful contact directly or indirectly results.  Collins v. State, Dept. of Justice, Div.

of Highway Patrol (1988), 232 Mont. 73, 80, 755 P.2d 1373, 1377 (adopting definition from

RESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF TORTS).  Here, the District Court found, among other things, that

the  confrontation between Myers  and Kamerick was  initiated when Myers  rushed  toward

Kamerick,  that  Kamerick  acted  in  self-defense  and  that  no  testimony  was  given  and  no

evidence admitted which causally related Myers’ “alleged jaw problems” to the altercation.

¶28 Myers specifically challenges the three District Court findings referenced immediately

above.    The  first  two  findings--that  the  confrontation  was  initiated  when  Myers  rushed

toward  Kamerick  and  that  Kamerick  acted  in  self-defense--are  supported  by  Kamerick’s

testimony and are contradicted by Myers’ testimony.  It is for the trier of fact, and not this

Court,  to  assess  the  credibility of witnesses  and weigh  the  evidence; we will  not  second-

guess  a  district  court's  determinations  regarding  the  strength  and  weight  of  conflicting

testimony.   Wareing  v.  Schreckendgust  (1996),  280 Mont.  196,  210,   930  P.2d  37,  45-46

11

(citations  omitted).    We  review  findings  of  fact  to  determine  whether  they  are  clearly

erroneous.  Wareing, 280 Mont. at 202, 930 P.2d at 41.  Here, the record establishes that the

first two findings challenged by Myers are supported by substantial credible evidence and

those findings are not otherwise clearly erroneous.  

¶29

The  third  finding  which  Myers  challenges  accurately  reflects  the  absence  of  any

evidence in the record, other than Myers’ own testimony, that the altercation caused him any

jaw problems.   It is true that Myers testified that he suffered from jaw problems which he

said resulted from the altercation; to that extent, the District Court’s finding is deficient.  It

is also true, however, that all of the court’s other findings relating to the altercation accepted

Kamerick’s version of conflicting evidence.  The District Court’s wording of this finding--

about Myers’ “alleged jaw problems”--makes it clear the court did not find Myers’ testimony

about  jaw  problems  resulting  from  the  altercation  credible.   We  will  not  second-guess  a

district court’s determinations as to credibility.  See Wareing, 280 Mont. at 210, 930 P.2d

at  45-46.    In  any  event,  the  trial  court’s  findings  that Myers  initiated  the  altercation  and

Kamerick acted in self-defense rendered this finding irrelevant. 

¶30

Finally, Myers challenges the following District Court conclusions of law regarding

the  confrontation between himself and Kamerick:   that no acts or omissions by Kamerick

constituted  intentional or negligent  torts;  that Kamerick  acted  in  self-defense;  that Myers

instigated,  consented  to,  and  voluntarily  participated  in  the  clash;  and  that  Myers  is  not

entitled to damages.  Myers’ challenges to these conclusions are based on the following legal

theories:  that, as a trespasser, Kamerick had a duty to leave the premises when requested to

12

do  so;  that Myers  did  not  use  sufficient  force  in  evicting Kamerick  from  his  premises  to

permit  a  self-defense  claim  by  Kamerick;  and  that  Kamerick  cannot  claim  provocation

because, as a trespasser, he is not entitled to assert self-defense against the use of nonlethal

force to exclude him from the property.  

¶31 We will not address an issue raised for the first time on appeal or a party’s change in

legal  theory  on  appeal.    Day  v.  Payne  (1996),  280  Mont.  273,  276,  929  P.2d  864,  866

(citation omitted).  Myers had ample opportunity to raise the legal theories set forth above

in the District Court.  He could have done so in his third-party complaint.  He did not.  He

could have done  so  in  the pretrial order.   He did not.   Because Myers waived  these  legal

arguments by failing to raise them in the District Court, we do not address Myers’ challenges

to the District Court’s conclusions of law.

¶32 Affirmed in part and reversed in part.  

/S/ KARLA M. GRAY

We concur:

/S/ JAMES C. NELSON
/S/ JOHN WARNER
/S/ PATRICIA O. COTTER
/S/ JIM RICE

13

