Robinson v. Astrue (CONSENT)

Doc. 18

IN THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
FOR THE MIDDLE DISTRICT OF ALABAMA
SOUTHERN DIVISION

JUANITA ROBINSON,

Plaintiff,

v.

MICHAEL J. ASTRUE, Commissioner
of Social Security,

Defendant.

)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)

CIVIL ACTION NO. 1:08CV391-SRW
(WO)

MEMORANDUM OF OPINION

Plaintiff Juanita Robinson brings this action pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 405(g)  seeking

judicial  review  of  a  decision  by  the  Commissioner  of  Social  Security  (“Commissioner”)

denying her application for disability insurance benefits under the Social Security Act.  The

parties have consented  to entry of final  judgment by  the Magistrate Judge, pursuant  to 28

U.S.C. § 636(c).   Upon review of the record and briefs submitted by the parties, the court

concludes  that  the  decision  of  the  Commissioner  is  due  to  be  reversed  and  this  action

remanded to the Commissioner for further administrative proceedings.

BACKGROUND

Plaintiff sought treatment from Dr. Lance Dyess on January 30, 2001 for complaints

of  back  pain  and  medication  refills.    Dr.  Dyess  noted  that  plaintiff  reported  that  she  felt

“much better.”  She weighed 297 pounds and her blood pressure was 150/80.1  His diagnoses

included hypertension, obesity, status-post CVA, osteoarthritis, and proteinuria.  He advised

1  Plaintiff’s height is 62 inches. (R. 158).

Dockets.Justia.com

plaintiff to exercise.  (R. 174).   At her next office visit, plaintiff complained of a cough and

shortness of breath.   Her blood pressure was 140/84.  Dr. Dyess added diagnoses of left otitis

media  and  bronchitis.    He  advised  her  to  lose  weight,  increase  her  fluid  intake,  and  take

Tylenol,  and  he  prescribed  medications.    (R.  173).    On  May  10,  2001,  plaintiff’s  blood

pressure reading was 180/90 and her weight was 304 pounds.  Dr. Dyess noted the change

in her blood pressure since the previous appointment.  He again advised her to lose weight,

referred her to a physician at the UAB hypertension clinic and ordered lab testing.  He noted

her “poor compliance.”  (R. 172).  

Plaintiff returned to Dr. Dyess on September 25, 2001.  She weighed 309 pounds and

her  blood  pressure  reading  was  down  to  150/88.  She  complained  of  pain  in  her  right

shoulder.  Dr. Dyess diagnosed morbid obesity, hypertension, status-post CVA, proteinuria,

osteoarthritis and right shoulder bursitis.  He refilled her medications, and referred her for

an appointment with a dietician.  He recommended that she gradually increase her exercise,

and ordered lab testing. (R. 171).  At plaintiff’s next appointment one month later, her weight

had increased to 311 pounds, and her blood pressure was 186/90.  She told Dr. Dyess that she

was “doing pretty good,” and she expressed surprise that her weight and blood pressure were

“up.”  Dr. Dyess noted pedal edema.  He changed plaintiff’s medication, ordered lab testing,

and prescribed a 1200 calorie diet.  The following day, plaintiff’s blood pressure was 150/96. 

(R. 169-70).

Plaintiff next returned to Dr. Dyess four months later, on March 4, 2002.  Her weight

was  310  pounds  and  her  blood  pressure was  140/80.   Dr. Dyess  ordered  lab  testing.   His

2

diagnoses  included  labile  hypertension,  morbid  obesity,  hyperlipidemia,  and  status-post

CVA.   He recommended that plaintiff lose weight and follow a 1200 calorie low salt diet

and referred her to a dietician. (R. 168).  On April 24, 2002, plaintiff’s weight was down to

296 pounds, and her blood pressure was 130/82.  She complained of right leg cramps.  Dr.

Dyess diagnosed transient right buttock and right leg pain and sciatica.  He noted that her

labile  hypertension  was  “controlled.”    He  again  noted  plaintiff’s  diagnoses  of  obesity,

hyperlipidemia and status-post CVA.  He recommended that plaintiff lose weight and advised

her to increase walking, as tolerated.  (R. 167).

Plaintiff did not return to Dr. Dyess for just over a year.  In an office visit on May 5,

2003, she weighed 304 pounds and her blood pressure was 170/90.  She reported that she was

out  of  her  blood  pressure  medications,  that  she  was  not  on  a  diet  and  that  she  was  not

exercising.   Dr. Dyess observed pedal edema.   He listed diagnoses of labile hypertension,

status-post CVA,  hyperlipidemia,  carotid  bruit,  and morbid  obesity.   He  noted  plaintiff’s

“total  non-compliance”  with  medications  and  medical  advice.    He  referred  her  to  other

physicians for gynecological examination, mammogram, and eye examination, and referred

her  for  an  appointment  with  a  dietician.    (R.  166).    Two  weeks  later,  on May  19,  2003,

plaintiff’s blood pressure reading was 210/110.  (R. 165).  On June 18, 2003, Dr. Dyess noted

that plaintiff’s hypertension had stabilized.  Her blood pressure was 140/90.  He diagnosed

hypertension -- stabilized, morbid obesity, hyperlipidemia, and carotid bruit.  Dr. Dyess and

plaintiff discussed gastric bypass surgery, and they spoke about “approach[ing] company for

medical  disability.”  (R.  164).    Two  months  later,  on  August  18,  2003,  plaintiff’s  blood

3

pressure was 140/88, and she weighed 302 pounds.   Dr. Dyess again noted pedal edema. 

Plaintiff reported that she was “doing pretty good.”  Dr. Dyess advised plaintiff to increase

her walking.  (R. 163).

On July 2, 2004, plaintiff quit her job as a poultry packer – a job she had held for over

twenty-four years –  to care for her husband during his final  illness.   (R. 78, 88, 157).   On

August 27, 2004, after her husband’s death from lung cancer, plaintiff applied for widow’s

benefits.  On  the  application  for  widow’s  benefits,  plaintiff  indicated  that  she  was  not

disabled.  (R.  78,  153).2  On  April  1,  2005,  Fortis  Health  denied  plaintiff’s  request  for

reconsideration  of  its  denial  of  her  application  for  health  insurance.  The  underwriter

concluded  that  plaintiff’s  coverage  was  denied  appropriately  based  on  information  the

insurance  company  had  received  from  Dr.  Dyess  “pertaining  to  build,  uncontrolled

hypertension, carotid bruit, congestive heart failure with last time seen in doctors office being

August 2003.”  (R. 104). 

Four months later, in August, 2005, plaintiff filed the present application for disability

insurance benefits.  When she applied for benefits, plaintiff reported that she “did not know

when she became disabled[,]” but that she had last worked on July 2, 2004.   She reported

that she stopped working because her husband was ill and she had to “see after him.”  She

also stated that she was filing for benefits because she “needed some insurance.”   (R. 36, 74,

78, 95-97).  

On  October  15,  2005,  Mark  Ellis,  D.O.,  performed  a  consultative  physical

2    Plaintiff  draws  $1003  each month  in  widow’s  benefits  based  on  her  husband’s work  history. 
(R. 20-21).

examination of the plaintiff.  Plaintiff weighed 302.8 pounds.  Her blood pressure initially

was 240/104, but was 212/92 later in the examination.  Dr. Ellis noted plaintiff’s uncorrected

vision as 20/30  in  the right eye and 20/400  in  the  left.   Plaintiff  told Dr. Ellis  that she has

problems at times with blurred vision in both eyes.  She complained of hypertension and of

back pain which had started five to ten years previously.  After examining the plaintiff, Dr.

Ellis noted that plaintiff had slightly decreased range of motion in her shoulder, elbows, and

knees and more markedly decreased range of motion in her hips and dorsolumbar spine.  (R.

161-62).    He  noted  that  she  has  some  “pretibial  edema.”  Dr.  Ellis  did  not  set  forth  any

specific functional limitations, but stated:

She has  some decreased  range of motion.    In  some ways,  this appears  to be
more due to the patient’s size than anything else.  She is not able to really lie
back on  the  table. Some of  this  is due  to  the patient’s obesity and size.   She
does appear to have pain in the lower back with certain movements and on the
x-rays.  Even though they are under-penetrated, she does appear to have some
decrease in the vertebral disc height in the lower lumbar areas.3

(R.  157-60).   On November  28,  2005,  plaintiff  reported  to  J. Walter  Jacobs,  Ph.D.,  for  a

consultative psychological evaluation.  Plaintiff stated that Dr. Dyess had prescribed Paxil

3  Earlier in the report, Dr. Ellis explained:

X-rays were obtained of the patient’s lumbosacral spine.  These were somewhat poor quality
due to the patient not being able to stand up well against the film also due to when trying to
do lateral films the patient’s hips are very wide and we really can’t get the area up against
the  film.    It  does  appear  though  on  these  films  that  she  does  have  some  decrease  in  the
vertebral disc height between L5-S1 as well as between L4-L5.  I do not see any fractures
or any displacements.  Really, no other abnormalities are noted on the plain film x-rays.  As
mentioned above, these were of poor quality secondary to the patient’s size and inability to
get these areas specifically up against the films due to adipose tissue build up around the
hips and buttocks area.  

(R. 160).

5

to treat her depression, but that she had never seen a mental health professional.  Dr. Jacobs

made  no  diagnosis,  stating  that  he  “could  not  find  clinically  significant  evidence  for

depression  or  anxiety.”    (R.  155).  He  added  that  “[t]here  is  the  possibility  that  Ms.

Robinson’s current antidepressant medication is effectively controlling symptoms, but Ms.

Robinson did not describe herself as being depressed at present.”  (Id.).

Plaintiff returned to Dr. Dyess on June 2, 2006.  Her weight was 289 pounds and her

blood  pressure was  200/100.    She  reported  that  she  needed  refills.   Dr. Dyess  diagnosed

malignant  hypertension,  obesity,  “R/O”  subarachnoid  hemorrhage,  aortic  sclerosis,

noncompliance with follow up and “?? medication compliance.”  (R. 123).  When plaintiff

next sought treatment from Dr. Dyess on January 3, 2007, her blood pressure was down to

120/80;  her weight was  292  pounds.    (R.  122).   On May  17,  2007,  plaintiff’s weight  had

decreased to 282 pounds; her blood pressure was 140/90.  She told Dr. Dyess, “I feel good.” 

On October 8, 2007, plaintiff reported that she felt “fine.”  At that visit, Dr. Dyess noted that

plaintiff’s  hypertension  was  under  “good  control.”    He  listed  other  diagnoses,  including

obesity,  proteinuria,  aortic  sclerosis,  hyperlipidemia,  congestive  heart 

failure,

hyperthyroidism, and history of remote subarachnoid hemorrhage.  (R. 120-21).

Although it is not clear from the record on what date he examined the plaintiff, Dr.

Mitchell v. Purvis, O.D., reported  to plaintiff’s representative on November 20, 2007  that

plaintiff’s corrected vision was 20/30 in the left eye, and that she is only able to see “finger

counting”  in  the  right.   He diagnosed  left  extropia, mild  cataracts, glaucoma  suspect,  and

“[b]lind left eye, due to old vein occlusion.”  (R. 126). 

6

On November 7, 2007, after the claim was denied at the initial administrative levels,

an ALJ conducted an administrative hearing.  The ALJ rendered a decision on February 20,

2008.  The  ALJ  concluded  that  plaintiff  suffered  from  the  severe  impairments  of

hypertension, back pain, obesity, and monocular vision.”  (R. 12).  He found that plaintiff’s

impairments,  considered  in  combination,  did  not meet  or  equal  the  severity  of  any  of  the

impairments  in  the  “listings”  and,  further,  that  plaintiff  retained  the  residual  functional

capacity to perform her past relevant work as a poultry packer, as she actually performed that

work.  Thus, the ALJ concluded that the plaintiff was not disabled within the meaning of the

Social Security Act.  On April 23, 2008, the Appeals Council denied plaintiff’s request for

review  and,  accordingly,  the  decision  of  the  ALJ  became  the  final  decision  of  the

Commissioner.

    

STANDARD OF REVIEW

The court’s review of the Commissioner’s decision is narrowly circumscribed.  The

court does not reweigh the evidence or substitute its judgment for that of the Commissioner. 

Rather, the court examines the administrative decision and scrutinizes the record as a whole

to  determine  whether  substantial  evidence  supports  the  ALJ’s  factual  findings.    Davis  v.

Shalala,  985  F.2d  528,  531  (11th Cir.  1993); Cornelius  v.  Sullivan,  936 F.2d  1143,  1145

(11th Cir. 1991).  Substantial evidence consists of such “relevant evidence as a reasonable

person would accept as adequate  to support a conclusion.”   Cornelius, 936 F.2d at 1145. 

Factual findings that are supported by substantial evidence must be upheld by the court.  The

ALJ’s legal conclusions, however, are reviewed de novo because no presumption of validity

7

attaches to the ALJ’s determination of the proper legal standards to be applied.  Davis, 985

F.2d at 531.  If the court finds an error in the ALJ’s application of the law, or if the ALJ fails

to provide the court with sufficient reasoning for determining that the proper legal analysis

has been conducted, the ALJ’s decision must be reversed.  Cornelius, 936 F.2d at 1145-46.

DISCUSSION

Plaintiff argues that the ALJ’s residual functional capacity assessment is not supported

by substantial evidence because the ALJ relied on the RFC finding of a non-examining DDS

consultant who is not a medical doctor which contradicts postural limitations observed by

Dr. Ellis during the consultative examination, and because the ALJ failed to obtain a medical

source statement from Dr. Ellis.  (Plaintiff’s brief, pp. 5-8).   She further argues that the ALJ

erred  by  failing  to  provide  a  narrative  discussion  describing  how  the  evidentiary  record

supports the ALJ’s conclusion that plaintiff can be “up on her feet for six hours of an eight

hour workday in light of her medically severe impairments.”  (Id., pp. 8-10).  Plaintiff’s final

argument  is  that  the ALJ  did  not  apply  the  correct  legal  standard  in  finding  that  plaintiff

could return to her past relevant work as a poultry packer.  She argues, specifically, that the

ALJ failed to develop the record adequately regarding the requirements of her past relevant

work.  Because plaintiff is entitled to reversal on the basis of this final argument, the court

does not address the remaining issues.

The ALJ concluded that plaintiff “has the residual functional capacity to perform the

full  range  of  light  work,  except  that  she  cannot  perform  tasks  requiring  good  binocular

vision.”  (R. 13).  He then concluded that she is capable of performing her past relevant work

8

as  a  poultry  packer  –  not  as  it  is  performed  in  the  national  economy,4  but  as  she  actually

performed it. (R. 15).  He states, “according to the claimant’s own description, she performed

no more than light exertional tasks in her past work.”  (Id., citing R. 74-75).

However,  according  to  plaintiff’s  description  of  her  work,  she  was  on  her  feet,

standing and walking, stooping and reaching, for the entire 8-hour workday.  She reports that

she packed chickens – each weighing two and a half to three pounds – into a seventy pound

box.  (R.  74-75).    She  states  that  the  “[h]eaviest  weight  lifted”  was  “3”  pounds,  and  the

amount of weight she frequently lifted was “2 ½” pounds. (R. 75).  She explained that she

packed the chickens into the seventy pound box and “would slide the box down the belt.” 

(R. 74-75).

Light work, according to the Commissioner’s regulations, “involves lifting no more

than  20  pounds  at  a  time  with  frequent  lifting  or  carrying  of  objects  weighing  up  to  10

pounds.”  20 C.F.R. § 404.1567(b). The term “light work” in the Commissioner’s regulations

has  the  “same  meaning  as  [it  has]  in  the  exertional  classification[]  noted  in  the  DOT

[Dictionary of Occupational Titles].”   SSR 00-4p; see also 20 C.F.R. § 404.1567  (“These

terms [sedentary, light, medium, heavy and very heavy] have the same meaning as they have

in  the Dictionary  of  Occupational  Titles,  published  by  the Department  of  Labor.”).    The

DOT’s definition of  the exertional  levels makes clear  that  the  requirement  to use  force  to

move  an  object  by  pushing  or  pulling  –  not  just  by  lifting  –  figures  into  the  exertional

classification  of  a  job.  A  job  which  requires  “[e]xerting  20  to  50  pounds  of  force

4  The VE testified that the work of a poultry processor is “medium and unskilled.” (R. 31).

9

occasionally,  and/or  10  to  25  pounds  of  force  frequently”  is  “medium”  work.    DOT,

Appendix C, Section IV.  See also Physical Residual Functional Capacity Assessment form

at  R.  142  (“Push/and  or  pull  .  .  .  unlimited,  other  than  as  shown  for  lift  and/or

carry”)(emphasis added). 

During  the  hearing,  other  than  confirming  that  plaintiff’s  “main  work”  was  “in  a

poultry plant as a packer”  (R. 20),  the ALJ did not question  the plaintiff about her work. 

(See  R.  18-31).    His  conclusion  that  her  past  work  was  “light”  rests  entirely  on  the  job

description in Section 3 of the Adult Disability Report.  (R. 15, ¶ 6 and R. 74-75).  However,

in  light  of  plaintiff’s  disclosure  that  she  was  required  to  slide  a  seventy  pound  box  of

chickens down a belt, the adult disability report does not support the ALJ’s classification of

the work as “light.”  If plaintiff were required to exert more than twenty pounds of force to

slide  the  seventy  pound  box  only  occasionally  during  her  work  day,  the  work  would  –

according to the DOT – be classified as “medium.”  The record does not provide substantial

evidence  to support the ALJ’s factual finding that plaintiff’s past relevant work “does not

require  the  performance  of  work-related  activities  precluded  by  the  claimant’s  residual

functional capacity” (Finding No. 6. R. 15) to perform the full range of “light” work which

does not require binocular vision.5  

5  See SSR 82-62 (“The decision as to whether the claimant retains the functional capacity to perform
past work which has current relevance has far-reaching implications and must be developed and explained
fully in the disability decision. Since this is an important and, in some instances, a controlling issue, every
effort must  be made  to  secure  evidence  that  resolves  the  issue  as  clearly  and  explicitly  as  circumstances
permit.  Sufficient documentation will be obtained to support the decision. Any case requiring consideration
of PRW will contain enough information on past work to permit a decision as to the individual's ability to
return  to  such  past  work  (or  to  do  other  work).  Adequate  documentation  of  past  work  includes  factual
information  about  those  work  demands  which  have  a  bearing  on  the  medically  established  limitations.

10

CONCLUSION

Upon  review of  the  record as a whole,  the court concludes  that  the decision of  the

Commissioner  is  due  to  be  REVERSED,  and  this  action  REMANDED  for  further

proceedings consistent with this memorandum opinion.

Done, this 26th day of February, 2010.

/s/ Susan Russ Walker                                              
SUSAN RUSS WALKER
CHIEF UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE

Detailed  information  about  strength,  endurance,  manipulative  ability,  mental  demands  and  other  job
requirements  must  be  obtained  as  appropriate.”);  see  also  20  C.F.R.  §  404.1565(b)(“Under  certain
circumstances, we will ask you about the work you have done in the past.  If you cannot give us all of the
information we need, we will try, with your permission, to get it from your employer or other person who
knows about your work[.]”). 

