IN THE SUPREME COURT OF TEXAS 444444444444 NO . 10-0506 444444444444 FORD  MOTOR  COMPANY , PET IT IONER , V . PATRIC IA  CHACON , ET  AL., RESPONDENTS 4444444444444444444444444444444444444444444444444444 ON  PET IT ION  FOR  REV IEW  FROM  THE COURT  OF  APPEALS  FOR  THE  EIGHTH  DISTR ICT  OF  TEXAS 4444444444444444444444444444444444444444444444444444 PER CURIAM In  this  case,  we  determine  whether  a  guardian  ad  litem  was  awarded  fees  for  work  that exceeded  the scope of the authority given  to him by  the  trial court.  The trial court appointed  the guardian ad litem to represent the interests of a minor-plaintiff during the resolution of a proposed settlement with one defendant in a multiple-defendant lawsuit.  After the settlement was finalized, the guardian ad litem continued to represent, without court order, the minor-plaintiff’s interests in her claims against the remaining defendants.  Because the guardian ad litem continued representing the minor-plaintiff’s interests without court order, we reverse the court of appeals’  judgment and render judgment that the guardian ad litem’s activities following resolution of the initial settlement are not compensable. In  2005,  Oscar  Chacon  suffered  fatal  injuries  in  an  automobile  accident.    The  accident allegedly occurred because a tire tread separated from the rear right tire of the 1998 Ford Explorer in which he was a passenger.  Chacon’s wife, Patricia Chacon, brought a wrongful death and survival action  on  behalf  of  herself,  her  husband’s  estate,  and  her  minor  daughter,  Valerie  Chacon (collectively,  the  Chacons).     The  Chacons  alleged  products  liability  claims  against  Ford Motor 1 Company and Cooper Tire & Rubber Company,  and a negligent entrustment claim against Darrel 2 Brown, the owner of the vehicle. Almost one year after filing their original petition, the Chacons informed the trial court that they had reached a tentative settlement with Cooper Tire.  In connection with that settlement, the Chacons requested that the trial court appoint a guardian ad litem to represent Valerie’s interests. The court granted the motion and appointed G. Daniel Mena as guardian ad litem.   With Mena’s approval, the settlement with Cooper Tire was finalized, and in October 2006, following a hearing to obtain court approval of  the settlement, a  judgment was entered  that  successfully  resolved  the Chacons’ claims against Cooper Tire.  At that time, Mena submitted to the trial court an application for $11,000 in compensation for his service as guardian ad litem in connection with the Cooper Tire settlement.   The trial court approved  the $11,000 award and  taxed  it against Cooper Tire in full. Subsequently, the case was transferred to a different court to avoid potential delays resulting from the election of a new trial judge. Despite resolution of the Cooper Tire settlement, Mena continued his involvement in the suit. In  September  2007,  almost  one  year  after  the  Cooper  Tire  settlement,  the  trial  court  ordered 1 T h e  d e c ed en t’s  fa th e r ,  O sc a r  C h aco n  S r . ,   la te r   jo ined   the  c a se  a s  an  ad d i t io n a l  p la in t iff . 2 P ire ll i  T ire  C o rp o ra tio n  m anu fa c tu red   th e   t ire   th a t   fa i led .    P ire l li  w a s   rep lac ed  a s   th e  d e fend an t  b y  C o o p e r T ire  &  R ub b e r  C om p any . 2 mediation on all of the Chacons’ still-pending claims against  the remaining defendants, Ford and Brown.   The order  for  referral  to mediation was sent  to all of  the attorneys  in  the case as well as Mena.  The mediation, which Mena attended, was successful and resulted in the parties reaching a settlement.   Mena, apparently acting as Valerie’s guardian ad litem, submitted to  the  trial court a report recommending the settlement.  Attached  to the report was a document listing billable hour entries  for Mena’s work  as  guardian  ad  litem  on  behalf  of Valerie’s  interests  against  Ford.    The entries totaled 87.25 hours of work, beginning in August 2006 during the Cooper Tire settlement. The  list  included  two pending  entries  for  future  activities—attending  the hearing  to  obtain  court approval of the Ford settlement and handling the investment of Valerie’s settlement proceeds. Ford objected to Mena’s fee request on several grounds,  including  that Mena had already been paid for his work in connection with the Cooper Tire settlement and that he was seeking fees for  activities  beyond  the  scope  of  his  duties  as  a  guardian  ad  litem  under  Texas  Rule  of  Civil Procedure 173.  Ford requested an evidentiary hearing on the matter.  On the morning of the hearing, Mena filed  a verified  report  that presented entries  totaling 80.75 hours of allegedly compensable work.  Asserting that a reasonable hourly rate would be $200 to $250 an hour, Mena sought a total fee in the range of $16,150 to $20,187.50.  When questioned by Ford about the entries, Mena stated that some of the entries were for work he had already performed during the Cooper Tire settlement. He explained  that he  sought  compensation  again  for  those hours  because  he  spent  that  time  also ensuring “that Ford Motor Company was not let out of this case” and because he “did some of the work simultaneously” in connection with all three defendants. 3 The trial court awarded Mena $17,087 in fees for his service on behalf of Valerie’s interests against Ford.  In reaching this total, the court began by removing two entries totaling half an hour for time in which Mena discussed his fees with Ford’s attorneys.  The court then compensated Mena for the remaining 80.25 hours at a rate of $350 per hour—$100 more than the highest rate requested by  Mena.    To  avoid  double  payment,  the  court  credited  Ford  $11,000,  which  was  the  amount previously  awarded  to  Mena  for  his  38.00  hours  of  work  in  connection  with  the  Cooper  Tire settlement.  Thus, the trial court ordered fees in the amount of $17,087 for 42.25 hours of work and taxed them in full against Ford. The court of appeals reversed and rendered judgment, reducing Mena’s award to $10,562.50. 321 S.W.3d 534, 544–45.   The court found nothing in the record to support the trial court’s $350 3 hourly rate and reduced the rate  to $250 per hour.   Id.   The court additionally noted  that the high hourly rate impacted  the double-billing credit, as Ford should have been credited $13,300 for the 38.00 hours of work at $350 per hour related to the Cooper Tire settlement.  Id. at 544.  The court of appeals otherwise upheld the fee award, holding that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in compensating Mena for the billing entries listed subsequent to the Cooper Tire settlement.  Id. at 544–45.  After multiplying the remaining 42.25 hours by an hourly rate of $250, the court rendered judgment for Mena in the amount of $10,562.50.  Id. at 545. On  appeal,  Ford  challenges  the  court  of  appeals’  fee  award  on  two  grounds.    First,  Ford contends that Mena’s role as guardian ad litem ended after the Cooper Tire settlement was finalized 3 M en a  d id  no t  fi le  a  b r ie f  o r  ap p e a r  a t  o ra l  a rgum en t  in  th e  co u r t  o f  ap p e a ls .   D e sp i te  th is  C o u r t’s  req u e s t fo r b r ie fing  and  m u l t ip le  fo l low -up  c a lls   to  M en a ’s  o ffic e ,  M en a  d id  no t  fi le  any  b r ie fing   in   th is  C o u r t . 4 on October 16, 2006, and that he should therefore not be compensated for any work done after that settlement.  Second, Ford argues that, even if Mena’s appointment as guardian ad litem extended past the Cooper Tire settlement, Mena billed for activities that are prohibited under Rule 173. A  guardian  ad  litem  is  an  officer  appointed  by  the  court  to  assist  in  protecting  a  party’s interests when that party’s next friend or guardian appears to have an interest adverse to the party. See TEX . R. CIV . P.  173; Land Rover U.K., Ltd.  v. Hinojosa, 210 S.W.3d 604, 607  (Tex. 2006). Texas  Rule  of  Civil  Procedure  173  governs  the  procedure  for  appointing  and  compensating  a guardian  ad  litem.    See  TEX .  R.  CIV .  P.  173.    Rule  173  requires  that  a  guardian  ad  litem’s “appointment  must  be  made  by  written  order”  of  the  trial  court.    TEX .  R.  CIV .  P.  173.3(b).    A guardian  ad  litem  has  the  burden  to  ensure  that  his  services  do  not  exceed  the  scope  of  the  role assigned by the trial court.  See TEX . R. CIV . P. 173.6(a); Stewart Title Guar. Co. v. Sterling, 822 S.W.2d 1, 10 (Tex. 1991) (placing the burden on  the guardian ad  litem  to prove that  the services rendered were reasonable and necessary).  In the context of that appointment, a guardian ad litem “may be reimbursed for reasonable and necessary expenses incurred and may be paid a reasonable hourly fee for necessary services performed.”  TEX . R. CIV . P. 173.6(a).  The amount of the award is within  the  trial court’s discretion.   See Ford Motor Co. v. Garcia, 363 S.W.3d 573, 578  (Tex. 2012).  Thus, we review the trial court’s fee award for an abuse of discretion, which occurs when the  trial court  rules  (1) arbitrarily, unreasonably, or without  regard  to guiding  legal principles,  or (2) without supporting evidence.  Id. As we recently explained in Ford Motor Co. v. Garcia, in determining the nature and duties of an appointment, we look to the context of the appointment and the duties assigned to the ad litem. 5 363 S.W.3d at 577.  In Garcia, we considered whether an attorney was appointed as a guardian ad litem or an attorney ad  litem.    Id. at 577–78.    In making  that determination, we explored  the  full context  of  the  attorney’s  appointment,  including  the  timing  of  the  appointment,  the  plaintiffs’ specific request in their motion for appointment of an ad litem, and the trial court’s order appointing the ad litem.  Id. at 578. The context of Mena’s appointment as guardian ad  litem clearly  indicates  that Mena was appointed for the limited purpose of determining and advising the court whether the Cooper Tire settlement was in Valerie’s best interest.  See TEX . R. CIV . P. 173.4(c).  The Chacons’ motion for appointment  of  guardian  ad  litem  specifically  stated:  “Plaintiffs[]  and  Cooper  Tire  and  Rubber Company  have  reached  a  tentative  settlement  agreement  in  this  case.    Plaintiffs[]  respectfully request[] that the Court appoint a guardian ad litem for purposes of disposing of [Valerie Chacon’s] claim  through  a  [hearing  to  obtain  court  approval  of  the  settlement].”    The  court  then  entered  a written  order  stating  that Daniel Mena  “shall  be  and  is  hereby  appointed Guardian Ad  Litem  to represent the interests of the minor child, VALERIE CHACON.”  After the Cooper Tire settlement was finalized and judgment was entered, Mena filed an application for compensation for guardian ad  litem  services  he  provided  in  connection  with  the  Cooper  Tire  settlement,  which  the  court awarded in full.  See TEX . R. CIV . P. 173.6(b) (“At the conclusion of the appointment, a guardian ad litem may file an application for compensation.”).  There was no subsequent motion or request for appointment of a guardian ad litem in connection with the Ford settlement, nor did the trial court enter an order appointing one.  In light of the requirements of Rule 173, we conclude that Mena’s work regarding the Ford settlement was beyond the scope of his original appointment. 6 At  the  evidentiary  hearing  following  the  Ford  settlement,  Mena  attempted  to  justify  his continued  involvement  in  the  case  by  noting  that,  at  the  hearing  to  obtain  court  approval  of  the Cooper Tire settlement, Ford made a settlement offer that mirrored the Cooper Tire settlement.  He argued that his obligation to represent Valerie’s interests required his continued close involvement in  the case until Valerie’s claims against Ford were  fully  resolved.   The  record  indicates  that  the Chacons quickly rejected Ford’s offer, at which point there was no pending settlement, settlement offer, or settlement discussion in the case for Mena to review.  And it was not until almost a year after the Cooper Tire settlement that the parties reached a tentative settlement, at which point Mena’s involvement might arguably have been proper.  However, even then, the record does not establish that Ford and the Chacons agreed to the appointment of a guardian ad litem.   See TEX . R. CIV . P. 173.2(a) (providing that a court must appoint a guardian ad litem when the guardian appears to have an interest adverse to the party, or if the parties agree).   Most importantly, the record contains no order from the trial court appointing Mena to act as guardian ad litem on behalf of Valerie’s interests in connection with Ford’s proposed settlement.  See TEX . R. CIV . APP . 173.3(b) (“An appointment must be made by written order.”). Mena fulfilled his duties as guardian ad litem upon  the finalization of the settlement with Cooper Tire.  Without a written court order, Mena had no authority to continue acting as Valerie’s guardian ad litem after the trial court entered judgment on that settlement.  Accordingly, we hold that all  of Mena’s  activities  subsequent  to  the  resolution  of  the Cooper Tire  settlement  exceeded  the scope  of  his  appointment  and were  not  compensable  under Rule  173.    Therefore,  the  trial  court abused  its  discretion  by  awarding  Mena  fees  for  activities  that  he  performed  without  a  written 7 appointment order.   Because we dispose of  this case on Ford’s  first  issue, we do not consider its remaining issues.  Accordingly, we grant the petition for review and, without hearing oral argument, reverse  the court of appeals’ judgment and render judgment that Mena’s fee award in connection with the Ford settlement be vacated.  See TEX . R. APP . P. 59.1. OPINION DELIVERED: June 29, 2012 8 