IN THE SUPREME COURT OF TEXAS 444444444444 NO . 10-0648 444444444444 EL PASO  FIELD  SERVICES, L.P. AND GULFTERRA  SOUTH  TEXAS, L.P. F/K/A/ EL PASO  SOUTH  TEXAS, L.P., PET IT IONERS, v. MASTEC  NORTH  AMERICA , INC . AND  MASTEC , INC ., RESPONDENTS 4444444444444444444444444444444444444444444444444444 ON  PET IT ION  FOR  REV IEW  FROM  THE COURT  OF  APPEALS  FOR  THE  FIRST  DISTR ICT  OF  TEXAS 4444444444444444444444444444444444444444444444444444 Argued January 11, 2012 JUSTICE   GREEN   delivered  the  opinion  of  the  Court,  in  which  CH IEF  JU ST ICE   JE FFERSON , JUSTICE  HECHT , JUSTICE  JOHNSON , JUSTICE  WILLETT , and JUSTICE  BOYD  joined. JUSTICE   GUZMAN   filed  a  dissenting  opinion,  in  which  JUSTICE   MED INA   and  JUSTICE LEHRMANN  joined. In  this  case, we  are  asked  to  harmonize  provisions  in  a  pipeline  construction  contract  to determine who bears the risk of obstacles in the pipeline’s path.  Specifically, we must examine the effect of the contract’s risk-allocation provisions in light of due diligence specifications under which the  pipeline  owner  was  purportedly  required,  but  failed,  to  provide  accurate  and  complete information to the contractor regarding the location of “foreign crossings.”   We conclude that the contract allocated all risk to the contractor for unknown obstacles discovered during the construction process.    Accordingly,  we  reverse  the  court  of  appeals’  judgment  and  reinstate  the  trial  court’s judgment. I. Factual Background El  Paso  Field  Services,  L.P.  purchased  an  eight-inch  propane  pipeline  from  Coastal Corporation.   The  pipeline was approximately  sixty-eight miles  long, and was constructed  in  the 1940s as an emergency war pipeline to transport petroleum from Corpus Christi to inland U.S. Air Force bases.  After determining that the pipeline was too shallow to be safe, El Paso made plans to remove the old pipeline and construct a new one that would carry butane, a byproduct of natural gas. El Paso invited MasTec, Inc., a company looking to expand its business to include energy pipelines, as well as other contractors to bid on a project to replace the section of the pipeline from Victoria to Nueces Bay.   MasTec had never  installed a pipeline,  and  its primary business usually entailed installing underground fiber-optic cables and telephone lines. Before  soliciting  bids  for  the  project,  El  Paso  hired  Gullett  &  Associates,  Inc.,  a  survey mapping company out of Houston, to survey the pipeline route.  This survey was compiled in the form  of  “alignment  sheets,”  which  showed  the  locations  of  280  “foreign  crossings”  along  the pipeline’s right-of-way, including other pipelines, utilities, roads, rivers, canals, fences, wells, cables, and concrete structures.  The alignment sheets were included in a bid package, which was distributed to the contractors at a pre-bid meeting to help them estimate the cost of constructing the pipeline. 2 To bid the project, MasTec hired as its general manager Bill White, who had forty-one years of  experience  in  the  pipeline  construction  business  and  had  a  team  of  construction  personnel, including  many  who  had  worked  with  him  for  almost  thirty  years.    White  attended  the  pre-bid meeting on MasTec’s behalf and received a copy of the alignment sheets, El Paso’s contract, and other  pertinent  information  for  estimating  the  cost  of  the  project.    At  the  meeting,  El  Paso encouraged each potential bidder to perform an aerial inspection of the pipeline route.  Subsequently, White  and  his  son  flew  by  helicopter  over  the  route  to  assess  its  general  topography,  landing occasionally to assess the soil conditions.  White testified that bidders were prohibited from entering certain private properties along the route, but El Paso later claimed that the contractors were able to enter those areas if they were escorted by an El Paso representative. Shortly thereafter, White submitted, on MasTec’s behalf, a completed contract and a bid on the project for $3,690,960, which was substantially lower than the other bids.  The average bid for the project was $8.1 million.   El Paso narrowed its choices to two contractors, then met with White 1 to ensure that MasTec would be able to complete the project according to El Paso’s time frame.  El Paso asserts that, at that meeting, its representatives discussed MasTec’s low bid with White, and then offered White the opportunity to withdraw the bid.  White disputes being told that the bid was low and denies being offered the chance to withdraw the bid.  Nevertheless, El Paso subsequently awarded MasTec the contract, which the parties entered into on June 10, 2003. 1 M a sT e c ’ s   b id   o f   m o r e   th an   $ 3 .6 9   m i l l io n ,   com b in ed   w i th   i ts   d am ag e   aw a rd   o f  m o re   th an   $ 4 .6 9   m i l l io n , ap p ro x im a te ly  eq ua ls   th e  av e rage  b id  am o un t  subm i tted  b y  o th e r  co n tra c to rs . 3 MasTec’s work on the project commenced later that month.  Although the alignment sheets showed  280  foreign  crossings, MasTec  discovered  far  more  foreign  crossings  by  the  end  of  the project.   Many of the undiscovered foreign crossings required a special weld, called a “tie-in” weld, 2 and about ten hours of labor, which substantially increased the cost of the work.  In a letter to El Paso dated September 8, 2003, White raised the  issue of extra costs associated with foreign crossings, though he did not make a demand for payment.  El Paso responded by letter on September 26, 2003, reciting  contractual provisions and asserting  that  the undiscovered  foreign crossings were within MasTec’s scope of work. II. Procedural Background In  2004, MasTec  filed  suit  against  El  Paso  for  breach  of  contract  and  fraud,  based  on El Paso’s  failure  to  locate 794 unknown  foreign crossings and  its  subsequent  refusal  to compensate MasTec for its additional expenses resulting from the crossings.  In the alternative, MasTec sought to recover under the theories of quantum meruit and quantum valebant.  At trial, the jury was asked whether El Paso failed to comply with the contract.   To answer that question, the jury was instructed 3 2 T h e   re co rd   co n ta in s   co n fl ic t ing   ac co un ts   o f   th e   a c tu a l   num b e r   o f   fo r e ign   c ro ss ing s .     S tev e   E dw a rd s ,   w ho M a sT ec   h ired   to   lo c a te   fo re ign   c ro ss ing s ,   te s t ified   tha t   h e   fo u n d   o v e r   a   tho u sand   fo re ign   c ro ss ing s .    G reg   P e rk in s ,   a m e ch an ic a l  eng in e e r  w ho  te s t ified  a s  an  exp e r t  fo r  M a sT ec ,  te s t ified  th a t  M a sT e c  lo c a ted  7 9 4  fo re ign  c ro ss ing s  and  th a t m o re   th an   2 0 0   w e re   m e ta l   p ip e l ine s   th a t   h ad   no t   b een   id en t ified   o n   E l   P a so ’s   a lignm en t   sh e e ts .    G u l le t t’s   su rv ey sup e rv iso r ,  R ich a rd   S chub e r t , who  E l   P a so   sen t   o u t   a t   th e   c lo se   o f   th e   p ro je c t  to   co n firm   th e   num b e r   and   lo c a t io n  o f ad d i t io n a l  fo re ign  c ro ss ing s ,  te s t ified  th a t  th e re  w e re  2 7 4  ad d i t io n a l  fo re ign  c ro ss ing s  and  1 2 6  ad d i t io n a l  tie -in  w e ld s . S chub e r t  a lso  te s t ified , how ev e r ,  th a t th e  a s -b u i l t  d raw ing s  G u l le tt  p rep a red  a fte r  M a sT e c  com p le ted  the  p ro je c t  show ed 3 4 3  ad d it io n a l  fo re ign  c ro ss ing s ,  inc lud ing  2 0 8  th a t  w e re  m e ta l.  In  th is  p ro c e ed ing ,  M a sT e c  a lleg e s  th a t th e re  w e re  7 9 4 fo re ign  c ro ss ing s   th a t req u ired  2 1 7  ad d i t io n a l   t ie -in  w e ld s . 3 I t ap p e a r s  from   th e  reco rd   tha t  M a sT e c  d id  no t  p u r su e  fraud  o r  m is rep re sen ta tio n  c la im s ,  no r  w e re  any   to r t th eo r ie s  subm i t ted  to  th e  ju ry .   In c id en ta l ly ,  M a sT e c  had  ind ic a ted  in  a  le t te r  to  E l  P a so  d u r ing  the  co n s tru c t io n  p ro c e ss th a t i t  d id  no t  b e l ieve  th e  om iss io n s  from  th e  a l ignm en t  sh e e ts  w e re  in ten t io n a l  o r  th a t  E l  P a so  w i thhe ld  in fo rm a t io n  from th em .   T h e  le t te r  s ta ted ,  “W e  m e re ly  fe e l  th a t  c ircum s tanc e s  b eyo nd  yo u r  c o n tro l ,  a nd  o u rs ,  h a s  [ s ic ]  h ad  a  co s t  im p a c t to  M a sT e c  w o r th  rev iew ing .”   T he  le t te r  th en  s ta ted ,   in  reg a rd   to   the  ad d i t io n a l fo re ign  c ro ss ing s :  “T he se  w e re  m o s t ly 4 to consider “whether El Paso exercised due diligence in locating foreign pipelines and/or utility line crossings.”  The jury answered that El Paso failed to comply with the contract and awarded MasTec $4,763,890 in damages.  Additionally, the jury found that MasTec failed to comply with the contract by not completing the work required in the contract and awarded El Paso $104,687.09 in damages. El Paso moved to disregard the jury’s findings and for judgment notwithstanding the verdict. El  Paso  urged  that  the  “due  diligence”  provisions  in  the  contract  “did  not  involve  any  future performance but at best constituted a warranty.”  El Paso further asserted that, regardless of the due diligence  provisions  in  the  contract,  MasTec  disclaimed  reliance  on  any  warranty  by  El  Paso regarding foreign pipeline and utility crossings.   The trial court granted  the motion and entered a take-nothing judgment in favor of El Paso, finding that the contract was clear and unambiguous and “allocates the risk of any additional cost incurred because of foreign pipeline crossings to MasTec.” In response, MasTec filed a motion to vacate the judgment, which the trial court denied. MasTec appealed, and the court of appeals reversed the trial court’s judgment.  317 S.W.3d 431, 434 (Tex. App.—Houston [1st Dist.] 2010).  On rehearing, the court of appeals issued a new opinion,  though it did not change its disposition or judgment.   Id.   The court of appeals held  that MasTec’s commitments and representations under the contract did not preclude its recovery based on the jury’s finding that El Paso failed to exercise due diligence in locating the foreign crossings. Id. at 456.   The court of appeals denied El Paso’s motion  for  rehearing en banc.    Id. at 431.   We granted El Paso’s petition for review.  55 Tex. Sup. Ct. J. 29 (Oct. 21, 2011). a l l  fib e rg la ss   l in e s  th a t  no  o ne  h ad  any  know led g e  o f .” 5 III. Standard of Review In  construing  a  contract,  we  must  ascertain  and  give  effect  to  the  parties’  intentions  as  S.W.3d 323, 333 (Tex. 2011).  In discerning the parties’ intent, “we must examine and consider the entire writing in an effort to harmonize and give effect to all the provisions of the contract so that none will be rendered meaningless.”  Id. (quoting J.M. Davidson, Inc. v. Webster, 128 S.W.3d 223, 229  (Tex.  2003))  (internal  quotation marks  omitted).   We  begin  our  analysis with  the  contract’s express language.  Id.  If we determine that the contract’s language can be given a certain or definite legal meaning or interpretation, then the contract is not ambiguous and we will construe it as a matter of law.  Id.  But, “if the contract is subject to two or more reasonable interpretations after applying the pertinent rules of construction, the contract  is ambiguous, creating a fact issue on  the parties’ intent.”  J.M. Davidson, 128 S.W.3d at 229. IV. Contract Interpretation El Paso relies on the following risk-allocation provisions in the lump-sum contract: 7.1 REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES [MasTec] represents and warrants to [El Paso]: (e) That its duly authorized representative has visited the site of the Work, is familiar  with  the  local  and  special  conditions  under  which  the  Work  is  to  be performed and has correlated the on site observations with the requirements of the Contract and has fully acquainted itself with the site, including without limitation, the  general  topography,  accessibility,  soil  structure,  subsurface  conditions, obstructions  and  all  other  conditions  pertaining  to  the  Work  and  has  made  all investigations  essential  to  a  full  understanding  of  the  difficulties  which  may  be encountered  in  performing  the Work,  and  that  anything  in  this Contract  or  in  any representations, statements or information made or furnished by [El Paso] or any of 6 its  representatives  notwithstanding,  [MasTec]  assumes  full  and  complete responsibility for any such conditions pertaining to the Work, the site of the Work or its surroundings and all risks in connection therewith; . . . . (g) That the Contract is sufficiently complete and detailed for [MasTec] to perform the Work required to produce the results intended by the Contract and comply with all the requirements of the Contract; . . . . . . . 8.1 CONTRACTOR’S CONTROL OF THE WORK (a)(7) [MasTec] represents that it has had an opportunity to examine, and has carefully examined, all of the Contract documents and has fully acquainted itself with the Scope of Work, design, availability of materials, existing facilities, the general topography,  soil  structure,  substructure  conditions,  obstructions,  and  all  other conditions pertaining to the Work, the site of the Work and its surrounding; that it has made all investigations essential to a full understanding of the difficulties which may be encountered in performing the Work; and that anything in any of the Contract documents or in any representations, statements or information made or furnished by [El Paso] or its representatives notwithstanding, [MasTec] will regardless of any such conditions pertaining to the Work, the site of the Work or its surrounding, complete the Work for the compensation stated in this Contract, and pursuant to the extent of [MasTec’s] liability under this Contract, assume full and complete responsibility for any such conditions pertaining to the Work, the site of the Work or its surroundings, and all risks in connection therewith.  In addition thereto, [MasTec] represents that it  is  fully  qualified  to  do  the Work  in  accordance with  the  terms  of  this  Contract within the time specified. Exhibits  B  and  C  to  the  contract  place  additional  requirements  on  both  parties.     Under 4 Exhibit B-1,  titled  “Contractor’s  Proposal,” MasTec  agreed  to  perform  “everything  necessary  to complete, satisfy, and discharge all Work and obligations imposed on [MasTec] connected with the performance  of  the Work.”    This  included  “[f]urnish[ing]  all  labor,  equipment  and materials  as 4 A r t ic le  2 4 .1  o f  th e  co n tra c t  exp re ss ly   in c lud e s   th e  exh ib i ts  a s  “p a r t  o f   th is  C o n tra c t  fo r  a l l  p u rp o se s .” 7 described in the Specifications for all Work necessary to perform the following applicable Work as shown on the Drawings, including, but not limited to: . . . welding (including tie-in and transition welds, if required).”  Exhibit B-1 further describes the scope of MasTec’s work: Any Work required to complete installation of the new pipeline but not shown as a pay item is no less included in the scope of work for installation of the new 8-inch Butane  Shuttle  pipeline  and  is  included  in  [MasTec’s]  lump  sum  proposal.    Just because an item of Work is not specifically identified, does not mean such Work is not included in [MasTec’s] scope of Work.  Any item of Work [MasTec] knows is required  for  completion  of  the  installation  but  not  specifically  identified  is  to  be included in [MasTec’s] Lump Sum Proposal. Exhibit C to the contract contains a lengthy collection of “Construction Specifications” for the project, which include the due diligence language on which MasTec relies.  Specification LP-5, titled “Ditching,” states under the heading “Company Foreign Line and Utility Crossings” that “[El Paso]  will  have  exercised  due  diligence  in  locating  foreign  pipelines  and  utility  line  crossings. However, [MasTec] shall confirm the location of all such crossings and notify the owner prior to any ditching activity in the vicinity of the crossings.”  Near the end of Exhibit C, Specification LP-17, titled  “Horizontal  Directional  Drilling,”  states  under  the  heading  “Foreign  Line  and  Utility Crossings”  that  “[El Paso] will  have exercised due diligence  in  locating  foreign pipelines and/or utility line crossings.  However, [MasTec] shall confirm the location of all such crossings and notify the owner prior to any [horizontal directional drilling] activity in the vicinity of the crossings.” Here,  neither  party  contends  that  the  terms  of  the  contract  are  ambiguous.    Indeed,  the contract’s plain  terms  are  clear.   MasTec  agreed  that  it  had  “fully  acquainted  itself with  the  site, including  without  limitation  .  .  .  subsurface  conditions,  obstructions  and  all  other  conditions pertaining  to  the  Work.”    It  also  agreed  that  it  had  “made  all  investigations  essential  to  a  full 8 understanding of the difficulties which may be encountered in performing the Work.”  In regard to potential work site conditions, MasTec “assume[d]  full and complete  responsibility  for any  such conditions pertaining to the Work, the site of the Work or its surroundings and all risks in connection therewith.”  All of this was agreed to “notwithstanding” “anything in any of the Contract documents or  in  any  representations,  statements  or  information  made  or  furnished  by  [El  Paso]  or  its representatives.”  These terms, in both Article 7.1(e) and Article 8.1(a)(7), clearly place the risk of undiscovered foreign crossings on MasTec.  And they expressly resolve any tension between the due diligence specifications and the risk allocation provisions.   Because MasTec abandoned its fraud 5 claim, MasTec is bound by the terms of this contract, regardless of whether it thought it contained different terms.  See In re Palm Harbor Homes, Inc., 195 S.W.3d 672, 676 (Tex. 2006) (holding that absent fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation in the signing of an agreement, the parties are bound by the agreement); see also Lonergan v. San Antonio Loan & Trust Co., 104 S.W. 1061, 1066 (Tex. 1907) (“[I]n the absence of fraud or other improper influence, competent persons may make their own contracts for lawful purposes and will be required to perform them.”). MasTec  argues  that  the  contract’s broad  “all  risks” provisions  are  limited by  the  specific exception in the due diligence specifications in Exhibit C.  Under MasTec’s reading of the contract, the “all risks”  provisions set out the scope of MasTec’s general responsibility, but the construction specifications remove from MasTec’s responsibility the location of foreign crossings through the 5 A l tho ugh  no t   ra ised  b y   th e  p a r t ie s ,  w e  no te   th a t A r t ic le  2 5  o f   th e  co n trac t  co n ta in s  an   o r d e r -o f -p r e c e d en c e p ro v is io n ,  w h ich  s ta te s :   “S ho u ld  any  co n fl ic t  ex is t  o r  ap p e a r  to  ex is t  b e tw e en  any  p a r ts  o r  E xh ib i ts  o f  th is  C o n tra c t ,  su ch co n flic t  sh a l l  b e  b ro ugh t to  th e  a t ten t io n  o f  [E l  P a so ]  and  [E l  P a so ]  sha l l  no tify  [M a sT e c ]  w h ich  P a r t  o r  E xh ib i t  sh a l l  h av e p re ced en c e .”   T h e  ve ry  n ex t p ro v is io n ,  how ev e r ,  s ta te s  th a t  “C o n fl ic ts  b e tw e en  th e  D raw ing s  and  th e  S p e c ific a t io n s  sh a l l b e  in te rp re ted   in  favo r  o f   th e  D raw ing s .” 9 exercise of due diligence,  a  responsibility  that was  allocated  to El Paso.   That  reading, however, ignores the plain language of the agreement:  MasTec assumes “all risks in connection with” “soil structure,  subsurface  conditions,  obstructions  and  all  other  conditions  pertaining  to  the  Work,” “notwithstanding”  anything  else  in  the  contract.    The  specified  conditions  relate  to  the  physical environment of the pipeline’s path, precisely the risk involved with unknown underground foreign crossings.  MasTec seems to have understood as much; its senior vice president testified at trial that foreign crossings were included in the risks covered by Article 7.1(e).  Just as we have held in the insurance  policy  context  that  “‘all  losses’  means  all  losses,”  “all  risks”  in  connection  with  the physical conditions of the pipeline’s path must mean all risks.  See Enter. Leasing Co. v. Barrios, 156 S.W.3d 547, 549 (Tex. 2004) (per curiam). MasTec argues that our reading of the contract renders meaningless the two due diligence specifications.  Indeed, when construing a contract, we strive to “give effect to all the provisions of the contract so that none will be rendered meaningless.”  Coker v. Coker, 650 S.W.2d 391, 393 (Tex. 1983).  While we have had occasion to give meaning to the phrase “due diligence” in other contexts, we must construe  it here  in conjunction with  the specific  rights and obligations contained in  this contract.    See,  e.g.,  Via  Net  v.  TIG  Ins.  Co.,  211  S.W.3d  310,  314  (Tex.  2006)  (discussing  due diligence  in  the  context  of  the  relationship  between  royalty  owners  and  lessees  in  oil  and  gas contracts); cf. Strickland v. Lake, 357 S.W.2d 383, 384 (Tex. 1962) (“The term ‘diligence’ is relative and  incapable of exact definition.    Its meaning must be determined by  the circumstances of each case.  Reasonable diligence has been defined as such diligence that an ordinarily prudent and diligent person  would  exercise  under  similar  circumstances.    It  is  usually  a  question  of  fact.”  (citations 10 omitted)).    Because  there  is  no  indication  that  the  parties  intended  to  give  “due  diligence”  any technical  or  special  meaning,  we  give  the  phrase  its  “plain,  ordinary,  and  generally  accepted  to  Black’s  Law  Dictionary,  “due  diligence”  is  “[t]he  diligence  reasonably  expected  from,  and ordinarily  exercised  by,  a  person  who  seeks  to  satisfy  a  legal  requirement  or  to  discharge  an obligation.”  BLACK’S  LAW  DICT IONARY  (9th ed. 2009).  With that in mind, we must harmonize the due diligence specifications with the other contractual provisions to ascertain the true intentions of the parties.  See Coker, 650 S.W.2d at 393. The  contract contemplates  a  joint  effort by  the parties.   The due diligence  specifications, which are contained in guidelines for the performance of ditching and horizontal directional drilling, state:  “[El Paso] will have exercised due diligence in locating foreign pipelines and/or utility line crossings.  However, [MasTec] shall confirm the location of all such crossings and notify the owner prior  to any  [ditching or horizontal directional drilling] activity  in  the vicinity of  the crossings.” Because of  the  joint nature of these obligations, our construction of this contract does not render these  provisions  meaningless;  rather,  our  construction  gives  effect  to  the  parties’  intent  that  the parties agreed El Paso had already exercised due diligence to locate foreign crossings, but ultimately the risk of omissions and  inaccuracies,  including the obligation  to  investigate and protect against additional  foreign  crossings,  falls  on  MasTec.    Greg  Floerke,  MasTec’s  vice  president  of communications, which  included  the  pipeline  unit,  explained:    “Due  diligence  in my  experience typically meant other than taking existing maps and lines—crossings and lines that are shown on 11 those maps, to take the extra step to go out [and] do something, additional due diligence to locate any foreign pipelines that might exist. Before  soliciting  bids,  El  Paso  took  steps  to  locate  foreign  crossings.    El  Paso  had  only preliminary  alignment  sheets  from  the  1940s  for  the  pipeline  at  issue,  and  no  as-built  alignment sheets.   Knowing  that  those  alignment  sheets were “very poor” and “inadequate,” and would not have shown any crossings installed after the pipeline was constructed, El Paso hired Gullett to survey the pipeline’s right of way.  El Paso instructed Gullett to locate as many foreign crossings as it could using metal detection and visual inspection, and to compile the findings into a map (the alignment sheets) that could be distributed to potential bidders.  Using four crews, Gullett’s surveyors walked the pipeline’s entire right-of-way, using an M-Scope, an advanced pipeline-locating device to find metal pipelines, as well as PVC and fiberglass pipelines with metal tracers.   Although El Paso did 6 not instruct Gullett to use other methods to locate PVC or fiberglass crossings that an M-scope and visual inspection would not detect, the record indicates that locating those lines would be very labor- intensive,  often  requiring  digging  by  hand  or  using  a  vactron,  a  hydraulic  vacuum  cleaner  that pressure washes holes.  Moreover, although El Paso did have parallel pipelines in the same right-of- way,  the  alignment  sheets  for  those  lines  were  also  from  the  1940s  and  would  not  have  shown foreign crossings built since then.  Similarly, although Valero had a pipeline in the same right-of- way, that pipeline was decades old, and testimony indicated that it was not customary for pipeline 6 M ik e  W h i te , who  a ss is ted  h is  fa th e r ,  B il l  W h i te ,  o n  th e  E l  P a so  p ro je c t ,  te s tified  th a t  PV C  p ip ing  is  req u ired b y  law  to  co n ta in  m e ta l  str ip p ing  so  th a t  it  can  b e  lo c a ted  by  su rv ey ing  c rew s .  S om e  o f  th e  und isco v e red  PV C  p ip e l in e in  th is  c a se  d id  no t  co n ta in  m e ta l s tr ip p ing ,  a s  i t  w a s  p laced  b e fo re  th e  en a c tm en t  o f  th e  law ,  m ak ing  i t  n e a r ly  im p o ss ib le fo r  an  ab o ve -g ro und  su rv ey ing  c rew   to  d e te c t   i t . 12 companies to share their survey data.  El Paso provided Gullett’s full survey to potential bidders, and there is nothing to suggest that bidders were confused about the extent of El Paso’s due diligence, which consisted of hiring Gullett to map the pipeline route using an M-scope and visual inspection to locate foreign crossings.  Nor is there anything in the contract to indicate that the parties intended El Paso to have any additional due diligence obligation. The dissent argues that El Paso’s due diligence did not meet the industry standard because El  Paso  did  not  locate  and  disclose  85-90%  of  foreign  crossings.   As  the  dissent  notes, we  have discussed due diligence  in  terms of  industry practice.   ___ S.W.3d at ___  (citing Exxon Corp. v. Emerald Oil & Gas Co., L.C., 348 S.W.3d 194, 206 (Tex. 2006)).  But the dissent essentially ignores the industry practice for locating foreign crossings on pipelines more than fifty years old, focusing on a numerical standard that is not supported by the record, which it believes should apply in every case.   Moreover, the dissent disregards the parties’ agreement that MasTec, which was given the complete alignment sheets and blank contract before it submitted a bid, acknowledged and assumed the risk of unknown foreign crossings, “notwithstanding” any other provision in the contract or any information furnished by El Paso.  MasTec agreed that the work to be performed under the contract, including  “all  .  .  .  procedures  and  techniques  necessary  to  perform  the  Work,”  which  required MasTec to “fully acquaint[] itself with the site . . . accessibility, soil structure, subsurface conditions, obstruction and all other conditions pertaining to the Work,” was consistent with “accepted industry standards.”   Were we to hold, as the dissent would have us do, that  locating  less  than 85-90% of foreign crossings is evidence of failure to exercise due diligence, we would disallow parties to define by contract what sort of diligence is due or to allocate by agreement the risk of additional unknown 13 foreign crossings, a result that runs counter to the freedom to contract.   See Gym-N-1 Playgrounds,  substitute  an  unsupported  standard  for  the  contracted-for  requirement  that  El  Paso  “will  have exercised due diligence.” El Paso’s initial obligation to have exercised due diligence does not limit the risk allocated to MasTec for omissions and inaccuracies in El Paso’s foreign crossings information.  In fact, the record  indicates  that  MasTec  understood  the  joint  obligation  contemplated  by  the  contract. MasTec’s comptroller for the project testified that “[i]t’s standard procedure in every job” for the contractor to survey a pipeline’s right-of-way to identify foreign crossings and their exact location. He further testified that such work was within MasTec’s scope of work under this contract, and that MasTec’s  bid  included  the  cost  of  hiring  a  surveying  crew  to  locate  foreign  crossings.   MasTec included a 15% markup in the bid as a contingency for undiscovered foreign crossings, higher than the  10%  usually  included  for  similar  projects.    Additionally,  MasTec’s  senior  vice  president acknowledged  that,  under  Article  7.1(e)  of  the  contract  (“anything  in  this  Contract  .  .  . notwithstanding”), MasTec assumed the risk of unknown foreign crossings.  In its response to El Paso’s  motion  for  judgment  notwithstanding  the  verdict,  MasTec  even  admitted  that  if  El  Paso exercised due diligence in identifying foreign crossings, “MasTec would be responsible for the costs associated  with  those  crossings  unidentified  on  the Drawings.”    The  problem  arises  in  this  case because although MasTec understood the risk of underground surprises and knew it assumed the risk for  such  surprises,  even  including  a  contingency  markup  in  its  bid, MasTec,  which  was  new  to pipeline construction, underestimated the amount of that risk and submitted a very low bid.  The role 14 of the courts is not to protect parties from their own agreements, but to enforce contracts that parties  MasTec argues that our construction of the contract renders meaningless other provisions, such as those relating to weather conditions, acts of God, and bodily injury.  But those conditions and circumstances do not arise in the context of the physical environment of the pipeline’s path, and thus do not fall within the plain language of the “all risks” provision at issue here, which limits the risks MasTec assumed to “conditions pertaining to the Work.”  The fact that those other risks are expressly  addressed  elsewhere  in  the  contract  does  not  affect  the  meaning  of  the  “all  risks” provisions in 7.1(e) and 8.1(a)(7).  In fact, those other contract provisions support our reading of the contract because they show that the parties knew how to state clearly when some risks were not to be assumed by MasTec. Our jurisprudence supports  this construction of the contract.   In Lonergan v. San Antonio Loan & Trust Co., we held  that  for an owner  to be  liable  to a  contractor  for  a breach of contract based on faulty construction specifications, the contract must contain terms that could fairly imply the owner’s “guaranty of the sufficiency of the specifications,” which were provided to the owner by an architect.  104 S.W. at 1066.  Here, as in Lonergan, El Paso did not guarantee the accuracy of Gullett’s alignment sheets.  El Paso and MasTec both relied on what Gullett’s surveyors were able to locate, with the negotiated provision that MasTec would confirm the surveyor’s work and assume the risks of “subsurface conditions, obstructions, and other conditions pertaining to the Work.”  We adhere to the “practically . . . universal rule” that “where one agrees to do, for a fixed sum, a thing possible  to be performed, he will not be excused or  become entitled  to additional compensation, 15  (Tex. 1938) (internal quotation marks omitted). Someone has to bear the loss of the additional costs of constructing the pipeline around the undiscovered foreign crossings.  As in Lonergan, “the parties were each competent to contract, and there is no circumstance indicating the slightest unfairness in the transaction.”  104 S.W. at 1065. While  MasTec  was  new  to  this  type  of  construction  project,  it  is  a  sophisticated  party  and presumably  had  experienced  attorneys  review  the  contract.    See  Schlumberger  Tech.  Corp.  v. Swanson, 959 S.W.2d 171, 179 (Tex. 1997) (allowing sophisticated parties to contractually preclude a claim for fraudulent inducement); see also Italian Cowboy Partners, Ltd. v. Prudential Ins. Co. of  Am.,  341  S.W.3d  323,  350  (Tex.  2011).   And  there  is  nothing  to  suggest  that  the  contractual provisions at issue here are unique or novel.  Sophisticated parties, like all parties to a contract, have “an obligation to protect themselves by reading what they sign.”  Thigpen v. Locke, 363 S.W.2d 247, 253  (Tex. 1962).   Ultimately,  this  contract “constitute[s]  the allocation by market participants of risks and benefits” regarding the pipeline’s construction.  Provident Life Ins. & Accident Ins. Co. v. Knott, 128 S.W.3d 211, 220 (Tex. 2003).   “The Court’s  role  is not  to redistribute these risks and benefits  but  to  enforce  the  allocation  that  the  parties  previously  agreed  upon.”    Id.  (citing  11 RICHARD  A. LORD , WILLISTON  ON  CONTRACT S § 31.5 (4th ed. 2003)). We have an obligation to construe a contract by the language contained in the document.  We have “long recognized Texas’ strong public policy in favor of preserving the freedom of contract.” Fairfield Ins. Co. v. Stephens Martin Paving, L.P., 246 S.W.3d 653, 664 (Tex. 2008); see also Wood Motor Co. v. Nebel, 238 S.W.3d 181, 185 (Tex. 1951).  “Freedom of contract allows parties to . . . 16 allocate risk as they see fit.”  Gym-N-I Playgrounds, Inc., 220 S.W.3d at 912.  Contract enforcement is an “indispensable partner” to the freedom of contract.  Fairfield, 246 S.W.3d at 664.  Were we to hold  in MasTec’s  favor,  and  conclude  that  El  Paso must  bear  the  risk  of  unknown  underground obstacles under this contract, we would render meaningless the parties’ risk-allocation agreement and ultimately prohibit sophisticated parties from agreeing to allocate risk in construction contracts. See Gyn-N-I Playgrounds, Inc., 220 S.W.3d at 912; Italian Cowboy Partners, 341 S.W.3d at 333 (instructing  that  we  examine  the  entire  writing  and  harmonize  all  provisions,  rendering  none meaningless).  That result would undermine the longstanding policy of this state. V. Conclusion For the reasons expressed above, we hold that the contract allocated risk for undiscovered foreign crossings to MasTec, and MasTec therefore must bear the loss of additional costs associated with the unknown foreign crossings.  Because MasTec was contractually obligated to bear this loss, we agree with the trial court that the jury’s answers to questions about MasTec’s recovery for breach of contract based on due diligence are immaterial.  Accordingly, we reverse the court of appeals’ judgment and reinstate the judgment of the trial court. __________________________________ Paul W. Green Justice OPINION DELIVERED:  December 21, 2012 17 