UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

DISTRICT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE

Kevin Hokenstrom,
Plaintiff

v.

Civil No. 04-cv-78-SM

Warden, NH State Prison,
Defendant

O R D E R

Petitioner seeks reconsideration of the denial of his

“motion to recall judgment” (document no. 35), arguing, with some

merit, that the margin order denial does not adequately inform

him of the bases for the ruling.  As petitioner is acting pro se,

and is not legally trained, the motion is granted to the extent

that the court will provide the following explanation for its

prior ruling.

The petitioner’s motion, ostensibly filed under Fed. R. Civ.

P. 60(b)(6)and (d), by its terms seeks to have this court's

original judgment denying habeas relief (on September 29, 2005)

vacated.  Following dismissal of his habeas petition, petitioner

sought a certificate of appealability, a necessary prerequisite

to his filing an appeal in the United States Court of Appeals for

the First Circuit.  That motion was denied on February 22, 2006,

on grounds that the petitioner failed to make a substantial

showing of the denial of a constitutional right.  Petitioner then

sought the necessary certificate from the Court of Appeals, which

request was also denied, on March 26, 2007.

Petitioner’s motion to recall the judgment, filed under the

provisions of Rule 60(b)(6)and (d) is, in substance, another

effort to obtain federal habeas relief in the nature of a ruling

that his state conviction and sentence are unconstitutional.  As

the Court of Appeals for the First Circuit has made clear, a Rule

60(b) motion that principally challenges the constitutionality of

a habeas petitioner's underlying conviction should be treated as

a second or successive habeas petition under the Antiterrorism

and Effective Death Penalty Act (AEDPA), Pub. L. No. 104-132, 110

Stat. 1214 (1996).  See Rodwell v. Pepe, 324 F.3d 66, 70 (1st

Cir. 2003) ("When the motion's factual predicate deals primarily

with the constitutionality of the underlying . . . conviction or

sentence, then the [Rule 60 (b)] motion should be treated as a

second or successive habeas petition.")  Here, the factual

predicate urged by petitioner as grounds for vacating this

court’s habeas judgment is that this court misunderstood, or

misconstrued, his original arguments, or erred in applying the

law to the facts of his case, and that a correct legal assessment

would result in federal relief vacating his state conviction. 

The motion, then, principally challenges the legality or

constitutionality of his underlying state conviction.

2

As the Rule 60(b) motion is properly treated as a second or 

successive habeas petition, this court is without jurisdiction to

consider it, absent prior authorization by the United States

Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, which authorization has

not been granted, and which petitioner has apparently not sought. 

See 28 U.S.C. § 2244(b)(3)(A); United States v. Barrett, 178 F.3d

34 (1st Cir. 1999).

Although the motion could be transferred to the United

States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit for consideration

as an application for leave to file a successive petition, see

28 U.S.C. § 1631, transfer is not mandated.  Because petitioner

has raised the same issues, in substance, previously, and the

Court of Appeals has resolved them, or has declined to issue a

certificate of appealability after considering the merits of the

issues that were sought to be raised, this second petition should

be denied without transfer.

In addition, the petitioner’s blanket motion to recuse the

undersigned and Magistrate Judge Muirhead was summarily denied

because it is facially without merit.  The motion, in substance,

seeks recusal based on prior judicial rulings and analyses

related to disposition of this case, and otherwise rests on

fanciful and unsupported perceptions of conspiracies or

collusions, none of which properly supports a motion for recusal.

3

Conclusion

The motion for reconsideration is granted to the extent the

court has provided its reasons for the prior summary denial.  The

motion, ostensibly filed under the provisions of Fed. R. Civ. P.

60(b), is properly treated as a successive petition for federal

habeas relief relative to petitioner's state conviction, and

therefore was denied.  This court lacks jurisdiction to consider

it, authorization to do so not having been granted by the United

States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit.

SO ORDERED.

October 31, 2008

cc:

Kevin Hokenstrom, pro se
Nicholas P. Cort, Esq.

____________________________
Steven J. McAuliffe
Chief Judge

4

